
The Ultimate Guide to Digital Marketing2The perfect resource for beginner to advanced digital marketers         
looking to learn new skills or hone existing ones.
The Ultimate Guide to Digital Marketing  is full of insights and strategy for 
business owners, marketing professionals, students, and anyone else looking to 
hone their current skills and get up to speed on the latest in digital marketing.
What is Digital Marketing?
Digital marketing is the act of promoting and selling products and services 
by leveraging online marketing tactics such as social media marketing, search 
marketing, and email marketing.  
If you’re new to digital marketing, it may feel overwhelming. 
We get that…
But in many ways, digital marketing is no different than traditional marketing. In 
both, smart organizations seek to develop mutually beneficial relationships with 
prospects, leads, and customers. 
Now, think about the last important purchase you made. Perhaps you 
purchased a home, hired someone to fix your roof, or changed paper suppliers 
at your office. 
Regardless of what it was, you probably began by searching the Internet to 
learn more and find your best options. Your ultimate buying decision was then 
based on the reviews you read, the friends and family you consulted with, and 
the solutions, features, and pricing you researched. 
Today, most purchasing decisions begin online.  
That being the case, an online presence is absolutely necessary—regardless of 
what you sell.CHAPTER
00
The Ultimate Guide to Digital Marketing3And having a strong digital presence will help you in multiple ways:
• It will make it easier to create awareness and engagement both before and 
after the sale. 
• You can convert new buyers into rabid fans who buy more (and more 
often). 
• You’ll enjoy all the benefits of word-of-mouth and social sharing. 
Be aware, though, the digital marketing scene is ever changing. Gurus, 
podcasts, and bloggers declare a tool or tactic hot one week and dead the 
next. 
The truth is, today, digital marketing is less about “digital” and more 
about “marketing,” largely because digital marketing has come of age. Its 
fundamentals have already been established.
At DigitalMarketer, our objective is to clear the confusion about the tactics 
that work and how to use them to grow your business. We stand against those 
so-called gurus who promote the next “shiny object” that will reportedly kill 
email marketing, digital advertising, or search engine optimization.  
Here, we’re all about the fundamentals.
As you’ll see in this guide, these core disciplines of digital marketing will be 
critical to your business growth today, tomorrow, and for years to come.  Each 
of these disciplines will be covered in a chapter of this Ultimate Guide to 
Digital Marketing  as shown below.
What You’ll Learn
Chapter 1: Your Digital Marketing Strategy Template
The Customer Value Journey is the strategic foundation of everything we do 
here at DigitalMarketer. It’s the master template upon which every other digital 
marketing discipline and tactic is built. Learn all 8 stages and how you’ll use 
them to create a winning strategy for your business.
The Ultimate Guide to Digital Marketing4Chapter 2: Developing a Content Marketing Strategy
Done right, your content marketing will not only attract prospects, but also 
move them through a marketing funnel to drive more sales and grow your 
business. Learn how to plan your content marketing strategy and how to 
create “perfect” content.
Chapter 3: Crafting a Digital Advertising Plan
The secret to powerful digital marketing is traffic. If you can master traffic 
acquisition, you can easily drive traffic, sales, and ultimately, growth. Here, 
you’ll learn the secrets to crafting a digital advertising plan that actually works.
Chapter 4: Understanding Social Media Marketing
“Going social” isn’t simply about being active on Facebook and Twitter. Learn 
the Social Success Cycle and how you can use it to attract your fans and 
followers, engage them, and even sell to them.
Chapter 5: Following Email Marketing Best Practices
Forget any rumors to the contrary. Email is alive and well—and if you know 
how to use it, it will help you exponentially grow your business. Learn the 
role of email in a growing business and how you can use it to quickly move 
prospects and customers through the Customer Value Journey.
Chapter 6: Designing Your Search Marketing Strategy
Search marketing has radically changed in the last few years. But we see that 
as good news! Today, it can boost your website’s traffic and visitors’ trust while 
supporting your other digital marketing disciplines as well. Learn the right  way 
to do search engine optimization here.
Chapter 7: Applying Website Analytics to Your Digital Marketing
If numbers aren’t your thing, we’ve got you covered. Website analytics are a 
powerful tool for helping you figure out what’s working, what’s not, and what 
to do next. Learn the process we use here at DigitalMarketer—an easy-to-
understand approach anyone can use.
The Ultimate Guide to Digital Marketing5Chapter 8:  Leveraging Conversion Rate Optimization to Drive 
Growth
Conversion rate optimization may sound hard, but it doesn’t have to be. 
And it’s critical to your success as a digital marketer. We’ll show you how to 
implement a simple framework that will guide everything you do as a digital 
marketer.
In each chapter, we’ll cover 4 key aspects to the strategy being discussed:
• The Methods:  the strategies and processes you’ll use to create your plan 
and execute it in your own business. This is the bulk of each chapter—
because in digital marketing, how you execute a strategy is key. And in this 
Guide, we share the exact methods we use here at DigitalMarketer.
• The Metrics:  the numbers you’ll watch to measure your success and 
identify areas that need tweaking (or are worth doubling down on).
• The Lingo:  the terminology used by experts, so you can communicate 
intelligently (even if you don’t consider yourself a pro).
• The Roles:  the people in your organization who will likely have 
responsibility for planning and running each tactic.
We’ve organized this Guide in a logical progression. Though you can jump 
around, learning the tactics in whatever order you feel you need them, we 
recommend that you read through the chapters in order. 
Take your time. Read and study one chapter at a time. Apply what you learn. 
And when you feel you’ve got the methods up and running, move on to the 
next chapter.
You’ll be surprised at how quickly you can implement these tactics if you focus 
on them one at a time. Then, when everything is up and running, you can 
focus on optimizing and improving your processes for maximum growth.
Ready to start?

Chapter 01: Your Digital Marketing Strategy 
Template (AKA The Customer Value Journey)7CHAPTER
01
This is where digital marketing begins and ends…
With a Customer Value Journey that strategically builds relationship with new 
prospects and converts them into loyal, repeat customers.
This Journey is the process every prospect goes through to become a new 
customer.
It’s how strangers become buyers and, eventually, raving fans of your business.
The hard truth is that marketing is not a one-step process. There are eight 
stages you must account for on the path to purchase and promotion. 
But, I have great news. If you understand this digital marketing strategy 
(a.k.a. the Customer Value Journey), then you can intentionally  engineer your 
business in such a way that it moves people predictably through the stages in 
this template.
In other words, you’ll no longer wonder if you’ll be able to generate leads. 
You won’t have to cross your fingers and hope for customers. When you 
understand the Customer Value Journey, even reviews and referrals will 
become automatic.
The Customer Value Journey is the strategic foundation of everything we do 
here at DigitalMarketer. It’s the master template upon which every other digital 
marketing discipline and tactic is built.
It’s so important, we confidently make this bold statement:
The job of marketing is to move prospects and customers seamlessly and 
subtly through each phase of the Customer Value Journey.
Chapter 01: Your Digital Marketing Strategy 
Template (AKA The Customer Value Journey)8In this chapter, we’ll start with a high-level map of the Customer Value Journey. 
Then we’ll dive into each of the 8 steps, talk about the tactics you’ll need to 
move people along the Journey, and review case studies so you can see it in 
action.
An Overview of the Customer Value Journey
So, now that you understand why it’s important... here’s what the Customer 
Value Journey looks like:
Click the image above (or click here ) to download your writeable copy of The 
Customer Value Journey
Chapter 01: Your Digital Marketing Strategy 
Template (AKA The Customer Value Journey)9Now let’s walk through the 8-step process of crafting your digital marketing 
strategy:
Step 1: Awareness
Before someone can buy from you, they have to realize you exist—right?
Well, that’s Step 1 in the Customer Value Journey.
This step is pretty self-explanatory: It’s where the person becomes aware of 
you. After all, nobody is born knowing who Apple or Amazon are. At some 
point they have to become aware of these companies if they are to become a 
customer.
The same thing is true of your company.
Examples of Marketing that Generates Awareness
There are any number of ways a prospect could become aware of your 
company, products, and services. Here are three possible scenarios:
• A father of two sees an advertisement for a new children’s summer camp 
on Facebook.
• An office manager searches Google to find a new coffee supplier.
• A college student watches an Instagram video of her friend raving about a 
new brand of noise canceling headphones.  
Facebook ads are the perfect vehicle for driving awareness. In this example, 
browsers are introduced to a home security company:
Chapter 01: Your Digital Marketing Strategy 
Template (AKA The Customer Value Journey)10
If you weren’t aware of Canary, this Facebook ad makes you aware.
Digital Marketing Disciplines That Create Awareness
To improve awareness of your company, the digital marketing tactics you need 
to master or hire include:
• Digital Advertising
• Search Marketing
• Content Marketing
• Social Media Marketing
Chapter 01: Your Digital Marketing Strategy 
Template (AKA The Customer Value Journey)11• Community Management
• Copywriting
Step 2: Engagement
Your prospect is now aware of you—they know who you are—but you’re still in 
the early stages of a relationship with them. They don’t yet know you, like you, 
or trust you.
So the next step is to start developing relationship with your prospect.
Step 2, Engagement, is where you start conversing with your prospects. You 
engage them through some form of content that provides entertainment, 
information, or both.
Engagement is something that must continue throughout the Customer 
Journey. It’s not something you do once and move on.  
Examples of Marketing That Generates Engagement
Engagement typically comes in the form of content or community.  Here are a 
few examples to get the ideas flowing for your company:
• A grandfather of five receives an email newsletter from his financial advisor 
detailing several ways to save for a child’s college tuition while reducing 
taxes.
• The owner of a boutique wine store becomes active in a Facebook 
community for wineries and other wine retailers.
• A new mother watches a YouTube video from Johnson & Johnson showing 
her how to give her baby a bath.
Chapter 01: Your Digital Marketing Strategy 
Template (AKA The Customer Value Journey)12
Engagement often occurs through valuable, relevant content.
Let’s look at another example of engagement from Modcloth, an etailer selling 
women’s clothing. This is an entertaining and educational piece of content 
for one of Modcloth’s most lucrative customer segments—people attending 
weddings:
Chapter 01: Your Digital Marketing Strategy 
Template (AKA The Customer Value Journey)13
You can boost engagement with content that’s as entertaining as it is useful.
Digital Marketing Disciplines That Create Engagement
To improve engagement in your company, the digital marketing tactics you 
need to master or hire include:  
• Content Marketing
• Social Media Marketing
• Email Marketing
Chapter 01: Your Digital Marketing Strategy 
Template (AKA The Customer Value Journey)14• Community Management
Step 3: Subscribe
At this point, your prospect knows who you are and has engaged with you in 
some way or another.
However, if you failed to get that person’s contact information, odds are high 
you’ll never hear from them again.
Why?
Because people today are inundated with marketing and content, creating 
a scarcity of attention. Just because someone reads one of your blog posts 
today does NOT mean they’ll remember to revisit your site in the future.
Instead, you need to get that person to progress to Step 3 in the Value 
Journey, which is to subscribe.
Here, the person gives you their contact information and, in doing so, grants 
you permission to contact them again in the future. 
Most often, this transaction is an exchange, sometimes referred to as an 
“ethical bribe.” You promote a valuable offer, but instead of asking for money, 
you ask for the prospect’s contact information. And when they give it to you, 
not only do you give them access to the content, product, or service you 
promised, you also add them to your subscriber list.
Examples of Marketing That Generates Subscribers
The biggest criteria for your free offer is that your target audience finds it 
valuable. Here are some examples from a variety of industries:
• A young professional signs up for a webinar presented by a local realtor 
about the best practices of purchasing a first home.
• A college girl fills out a form on a blog to receive a free sample of a new 
face cream.
Chapter 01: Your Digital Marketing Strategy 
Template (AKA The Customer Value Journey)15• The Human Resources manager at a mid-sized accounting firm signs up 
for a demo of a new application he can use to manage the hiring of new 
employees.
In each case, the prospect fills out a form, provides their contact information, 
and is sent information about how to access the offer. 
• The young professional is sent the time and URL of the webinar.  
• The college girl is sent a thank-you email telling her the face cream is in the 
mail.
• The manager is contacted to schedule his demo.
But it always starts with a form. For example, here’s how Salesforce generates 
leads with a whitepaper offer. 
Salesforce’s offer is perfect for the Subscription stage of their               
Customer Journey.
Chapter 01: Your Digital Marketing Strategy 
Template (AKA The Customer Value Journey)16Digital Marketing Disciplines That Generate Subscribers
To get more subscriptions for your company, the digital marketing tactics you 
need to master or hire  include:
• Content Marketing
• Email Marketing
• Digital Advertising
• Community Management
• Conversion Rate Optimization
• Copywriting 
Step 4: Convert
If the subscribers you gain in Step 3 of the journey remain engaged, some 
of them will be ready to increase their level of commitment. They like the 
information you share and have begun to trust you, so they’re ready to invest 
in one of two ways: either with time or money.  
This is a critical stage in the Customer Journey and one that frustrates many 
business owners. The key to success in this stage is to employ what we call 
“entry-point offers.” These offers are designed to give the new prospect 
tremendous value without forcing them to put too much “skin in the game.”  
At this stage, to ask for a significant investment in a complex pr oduct or 
service would be asking too much, too soon. You’re still in the early stages of 
relationship. 
In fact, it’s too early even to concern yourself with profitability.  That’s right: in 
this stage of the Customer Journey, you might lose money on the prospects 
you acquire as buyers.  
This is, perhaps, the most important lesson you must learn so it bears 
repeating:  
Chapter 01: Your Digital Marketing Strategy 
Template (AKA The Customer Value Journey)17The Convert stage of the Customer Value Journey is about acquiring 
buyers or ramping up the commitment level of the leads you already 
have.  It is NOT about profitability.   
The most valuable businesses in the world all understand that the costliest 
marketing activity your business undertakes is customer acquisition. It’s the 
reason Sprint is willing to buy you out of your Verizon cell phone contract and 
give you a free phone. It’s the reason GoDaddy offers domains for $2.95, and 
it’s the reason VistaPrint will sell you 500 business cards for $9.  
The goal is to acquire a new customer. Profits come later.
Examples of Marketing That Generates Conversions
There are two types of entry-point offers: those that require a commitment 
of time, and those that require a commitment of money.  Here are some 
examples:
• The VP of Operations at a large company purchases a high-dollar 
management consultant’s book for $8 on the consultant’s website. 
• A daughter of elderly parents schedules a walk-through visit at the local 
retirement home.
• A man takes advantage of a $20 teeth whitening service at his local dentist. 
Notice the price point of each of these offers: from $8 to $20.
Your goal here is not to make a huge profit. It’s to get customers, to shift the 
relationship between you and your subscribers. Because, as you’ll see, once 
someone is a customer, it’s much more likely that person will purchase higher-
ticket, more complex products and services and do it more frequently. 
Remember, one of the costliest (in time, money, resources) marketing activities 
your business will undertake is the acquisition of customers.  The good news is 
that once you’ve acquired them, you don’t need to pay to acquire them again.  
Here’s an example of an offer from GoDaddy that does a great job of acquiring 
new customers with extremely low-priced domain registration services:
Chapter 01: Your Digital Marketing Strategy 
Template (AKA The Customer Value Journey)18
By offering a fantastic up-front deal, GoDaddy easily acquires the customer.
Getting that initial conversion was the hard part. Now they can build the 
customer relationship to create profits down the road.
Digital Marketing Disciplines That Generate Conversions
To improve conversions in your company, the digital marketing tactics you 
need to master or hire include:
• Digital Advertising
• Content Marketing
• Copywriting
• Email Marketing
• Search Marketing
Step 5: Excite
At this point, your new customer has had a transaction with you. A small 
transaction, sure, but a transaction nonetheless.
Chapter 01: Your Digital Marketing Strategy 
Template (AKA The Customer Value Journey)19Your job now is to make sure the transaction is a good one, that the 
excitement of the purchase develops into good will and trust.
The reason for this is simple: if the person doesn’t get value from this 
transaction, they won’t move on to the next stage and purchase more 
expensive things from you.
So, how do you make sure your customers have a good experience?
First, we assume that whatever the prospect purchased or gave up valuable 
time for is outstanding. Great marketing will only increase the speed at which 
your business fails if you don’t have outstanding products and services.  
Second, the prospect must get value from their last transaction with you. The 
Excite stage of the Customer Value Journey is something you must return to 
again and again. And every time, it should create excitement.
That being the case, whenever a customer or prospect does what you ask 
them to do (attend this webinar, buy this product, hire me for this service), you 
should engineer your marketing to maximize the chances they’ll get tangible 
value from the experience.
Examples of Marketing That Creates Excitement
Your goal in the Excite stage of the Customer Value Journey is to make sure 
your customer gets value from their transaction.  Here are some examples:
• A married couple buys a Keurig (coffee maker) and uses the free coffee 
servings and Quick Start Guide to have an amazing cup of coffee within 
minutes of opening the box.
• A new user of the Spotify music streaming app goes through an 
instructional walkthrough teaching her how to build a playlist of her favorite 
songs.
• A young man reads through 3 eye-opening blog posts recommended 
via email by his newly hired Life Coach in advance of their first coaching 
session.
Chapter 01: Your Digital Marketing Strategy 
Template (AKA The Customer Value Journey)20This stage is all about ensuring that your marketing is giving your customer 
opportunity to get value from doing business with you—and to enjoy that 
value right away.
It could be as simple as an email onboarding campaign, like this one from the 
productivity app, Evernote:
An onboarding campaign is a simple way to add value immediately             
after a purchase.
Evernote is a cloud-based note-taking app that you can use to sync notes 
between your computer, phone, and tablet. It has a lot of useful features, but 
Evernote knows that, in order to really hook new users and turn them into 
long-lasting customers, they have to make sure new users are successful with 
the app.
That’s why Evernote sends you these educational emails when you sign up for 
a new account. The emails contain tips that help you to get more value out of 
the application, making you more excited about it and more likely to use it.
Digital Marketing Disciplines That Create Excitement
To improve consumption in your company, the digital marketing tactics you 
need to master or hire include:
• Email Marketing
• Content Marketing
Chapter 01: Your Digital Marketing Strategy 
Template (AKA The Customer Value Journey)21• Copywriting
Step 6: Ascend
At this stage of the Value Journey, you’ve sunk time, money, and resources 
into acquiring leads and customers and making sure they get value from doing 
business with you.  
It’s entirely possible that, until this stage, you have yet to turn a profit.  In fact, 
if you’re in a competitive market (and who isn’t?) you may be losing  money on 
the front end of this process to acquire customers.
That’s perfectly acceptable, and here’s why:
You’re investing in your future profits. 
Always remember that it costs more to acquire a new customer than to sell 
to an existing one. That first sales isn’t about profits. It’s about converting a 
prospect to a customer, so you can begin a long (and profitable) customer 
relationship. 
Buying customers on the front end is just shrewd business, but only if you can 
monetize those customers on the back end.  
The Ascend stage of the Value Journey is where your customer will be ready to 
buy more and more often.  If your business has a core offer, this is the place to 
make that offer. Then once your customer purchases that core offer, it’s time to 
present them with other relevant offers.
You’ll notice that the Value Journey worksheet represents the Ascent stage as 
a ladder. That’s no accident. This is really a ladder that will hopefully lead to 
multiple purchases over time.
Examples of Marketing That Creates Ascension
Examples of ascension might include:
• A dating couple rent a convertible in San Diego and pay extra for satellite 
radio and GPS.
Chapter 01: Your Digital Marketing Strategy 
Template (AKA The Customer Value Journey)22• A new dad buys a digital camera for $2,495 and adds a lens kit, camera 
bag, and tripod to his purchase for a bundle price of $699.
• A woman with a brand new Mercedes buys an unlimited car wash package 
for $40 per month instead of paying for each car wash individually.
Here’s how Southwest Airlines creates ascension by making an offer that will 
improve your experience and increase the value of your transaction:
Southwest’s ascension offer is an affordable add-on that improves their 
customer’s experience. 
When you execute this stage properly, your customers will thank you for these 
offers.  Southwest airlines customers who want to board the plane early are 
happy to pay an extra $15 to avoid hectic boarding.
Digital Marketing Disciplines That Create Ascension
To improve ascension in your company, the digital marketing tactics you need 
to master or hire include:
• Email Marketing
• Copywriting
Chapter 01: Your Digital Marketing Strategy 
Template (AKA The Customer Value Journey)23• Digital Advertising
• Content Marketing
Step 7: Advocate
You now have a happy customer who has made several profitable purchases 
from you. The next stage in the Value Journey is to create marketing that 
encourages your most loyal customers to advocate for your business .
An advocate is someone who speaks positively about your brand. 
An advocate is what you might call a “passive promoter.” They won’t 
necessarily promote your business in an active way, but when asked about you, 
they will respond favorably.
Examples of Marketing That Generates Advocates
These final two stages (Advocate and Promote) are often thought to be 
outside of the control of marketing, but that simply isn’t true. You can create 
marketing that intentionally generates more advocates and promoters.
Here are a few examples:
• A woman enters a contest to win a new lip gloss from a beauty company 
by shooting a video review detailing how much she loves one of their 
lipsticks.
• Upon request, the Warehouse Manager at a produce supplier company 
writes a glowing review of the local courier service she uses to transport 
fruits and vegetables locally. 
Designer Shoe Warehouse knows the value of the Advocate stage in the 
Customer Journey. This email is designed to activate advocates by asking for a 
review:
Chapter 01: Your Digital Marketing Strategy 
Template (AKA The Customer Value Journey)24
DSW actively encourages customers to become advocates.
Digital Marketing Disciplines That Generate Advocates
Getting advocates is important because it helps generate awareness, trust, 
and credibility with a wider audience—which helps you to get more customers 
and grow your business.
To get more advocates in your company, the marketing efforts you need to 
work on include:
• Social Media Marketing
• Email marketing
• Search Marketing
Step 8: Promote
Promoters differ from advocates in that they are actively seeking to spread the 
word about your brands, products, and services.
Chapter 01: Your Digital Marketing Strategy 
Template (AKA The Customer Value Journey)25In some cases, the promoter simply had a great experience with your company 
and wants to share their story with friends and family. In other cases, they 
promote because you’ve created an incentive for them to do so.
This puts your message in front of a new audience, the fans, followers, and 
friends of the promoter. And because this new audience is hearing about you 
from a trusted source who they already know, they’re much more likely to 
become customers themselves.
Examples of Marketing That Generates Promoters
Intentionally creating more promoters is important because it creates an army 
of paid or unpaid salespeople spreading the word about what you sell.
Here are a few examples:
• A man who runs a podcast about fishing earns a 20% commission every 
time one of his listeners buys fishing equipment using his affiliate link. 
• A woman attends a conference for free because she arranged for 5 of her 
colleagues to go as well.
• A marketing agency partners with a marketing automation software 
company to resell their software for a commission. 
As you can see, promoters help you get more customers at a lower cost. So 
even when you reward promoters, it’s a win-win.
A good example of this is Dropbox. When it was just starting out as a new 
company in a new industry, they realized discoverability would be key to 
their success. So they initiated a referral program that gave its users a strong 
incentive to promote the service to others.
Chapter 01: Your Digital Marketing Strategy 
Template (AKA The Customer Value Journey)26
By generously rewarding users who promoted Dropbox, word spread quickly 
about the new cloud-storage service.
Simply by inviting your contacts to try out Dropbox, you could increase your 
own online storage space from 2 GB up to 16 GB. This was such an attractive 
offer, thousands of new users recruited their friends and family, helping turn 
Dropbox into a software giant (valued at $10 billion in 2014).
Digital Marketing Disciplines That Generate Promoters
To get more promoters in your company, the marketing efforts you need to 
work on include:
• Email Marketing
• Copywriting
Chapter 01: Your Digital Marketing Strategy 
Template (AKA The Customer Value Journey)27How To Move Prospects Through The Customer Value 
Journey
Now that you know what the Customer Value Journey is, the next thing you 
need to understand is:
How do you seamlessly and subtly move customers and prospects through 
each phase of the Customer Value Journey?
The short answer? You build marketing CAMPAIGNS that INTENTIONALLY 
move people from one stage to the next.
And those two words— campaigns and intentionally —are important here. So 
let’s unpack them one at a time.
What Is A Marketing Campaign?
First, let’s talk about what a campaign really is.
A marketing campaign has two critical components:
• A call to action
• A traffic source
The call to action is what you want people to do. If the marketing campaign 
you’re creating is aimed at the Subscribe stage of the Customer Journey, your 
call to action might be for people to download a whitepaper, checklist, or 
video resource. If it’s a campaign in the Convert or Ascend stage, your call to 
action might be to buy a product or service. If the campaign you are creating 
is for the Awareness stage, the call to action might be as simple as listening to 
a podcast episode or reading a blog post.
The traffic source could be digital clicks from ads, email, social media sites, or 
search engines like Google. Offline marketing could include direct mail, TV, or 
radio advertising, print ads, or anything else that gets the call to action in front 
of your prospects.
Chapter 01: Your Digital Marketing Strategy 
Template (AKA The Customer Value Journey)28Now that you know what a campaign IS, let’s talk about what a campaign is 
supposed to DO.
The purpose of a marketing campaign is to intentionally move people from 
one stage of the Value Journey to the next.
For example:
A campaign might have the goal of getting people to sign up for your email 
list (going from Engaged to Subscribe).
Another campaign might have the goal of getting new customers excited 
about their purchase (going from Convert to Excite).
Once again, notice that a campaign is intentionally moving people through the 
Value Journey. And that word “intentionally” is important.
Intentionally Moving Customers Through The Value Journey
Anyone who has ever become a customer of a company has moved through 
the Value Journey, whether that company made it happen intentionally or not.
Sometimes, people move through the Value Journey on accident.
For example, imagine that you had never heard of Dropbox before. Then, one 
day, a friend tells you that he uses Dropbox to store all his files online, and he 
recommends that you check it out.
At this point, both you and your friend have progressed along the Value 
Journey. You have moved to Step 1, Aware, and your friend has moved to Step 
8, Promote.
However, this progression didn’t happen because of anything Dropbox did 
intentionally.  It resulted from a random comment or a casual conversation 
between you and your friend.
Contrast that with Dropbox’s marketing campaign offering extra space to 
customers who refer friends and family:
Chapter 01: Your Digital Marketing Strategy 
Template (AKA The Customer Value Journey)29
Offer rewards for people taking the action you want them to take.
In this example, Dropbox is moving people along the value journey 
INTENTIONALLY by creating a program that is designed for that specific 
purpose. 
This is an important distinction to make.
Once you figure out that you can move people intentionally through the Value 
Journey using marketing campaigns, you realize that you have the ability to 
grow your business by improving the areas where your customers are getting 
“stuck.”
At this point I’d like to point out that there’s one common mistake that many 
companies make when trying to move customers and prospects through the 
Customer Value Journey.
Chapter 01: Your Digital Marketing Strategy 
Template (AKA The Customer Value Journey)30The #1 Mistake Marketers Make When Creating Campaigns
Once a business understands the Customer Journey, they can get so excited 
about the possibilities that they try to move people all the way from stranger 
to promoter in one step, in one campaign. 
This is impossible.
You cannot possibly create one campaign that makes people aware of you, 
engages them, gets them to subscribe and convert, excites them, ascends 
them, and then turns them into advocates and promoters.
Instead, you need to create multiple  specific campaigns that are designed to 
move people from one stage to the next. (Or in some cases, a campaign can 
probably move people through 2 or maybe 3 steps at once.)
The best way to explain this is with a few case studies.
Value Journey Campaign Case Studies
Case Study: DigitalMarketer
• Campaign Goal:  Aware to Engage
• Content Needed:  Branding Video
• Traffic Source:  Facebook Ads (Video Views campaign)
• Call to Action:  End the war between sales and marketing... watch this 
video!
When we create a new campaign here at DigitalMarketer, we always start 
by looking at the Value Journey map and identifying any steps where we 
need help. In this case, we realized that while we were doing a good job 
of generating awareness through Facebook ads, we didn’t have a good 
engagement campaign in place.
So we decided to create some content (a branding video) whose goal was to 
get people engaged with DigitalMarketer:
Chapter 01: Your Digital Marketing Strategy 
Template (AKA The Customer Value Journey)31We call this video the “Valentine’s Day War on Sales & Marketing.”
But as you know, just creating a video isn’t enough. We also had to decide 
how we were going to get people to watch the video. So we chose to run a 
Facebook ad campaign (with video views as the goal) to generate traffic to the 
video. This made up the “Traffic” portion of our campaign.
Here’s what one of those ads looked like:

Chapter 01: Your Digital Marketing Strategy 
Template (AKA The Customer Value Journey)32
Advertising is the best way to get eyeballs on your content—for all stages of 
the Customer Journey.
Because the goal of this campaign is to get people engaged with us, our call 
to action was very simple: “Watch this video!”
Chapter 01: Your Digital Marketing Strategy 
Template (AKA The Customer Value Journey)33It’s important to note that we didn’t try to convince people to sign up or 
buy anything (at least not right away), because that wasn’t the goal of this 
campaign. The goal was to generate engagement, and it succeeded very well 
because it was focused 100% on simply engaging people.
Case Study: ModCloth
Campaign Goal:  Engage to Subscribe
Content Needed: Blog Post
Traffic Source:  Facebook organic traffic
Call to action: Sign up for ModCloth’s good news and great offers!
Here’s an example of a campaign with a different goal. In this case, the 
clothing company ModCloth wanted people who were already engaged with 
their content to subscribe to their email list.
The content needed for this campaign was pretty straightforward: it’s a blog 
post. When you go to the ModCloth blog, you’ll see many helpful blog articles 
like this one:
ModCloth leveraged this blog post to drive subscriptions.
Chapter 01: Your Digital Marketing Strategy 
Template (AKA The Customer Value Journey)34Because ModCloth has a lot of engaged Facebook followers, they were able 
to use free organic Facebook traffic as their traffic source. (Remember, you 
don’t always have to pay for traffic.)
So we have content and a traffic source. Now, what’s the call to action?
Well, you’ll notice that while you’re browsing the blog you’ll be greeted with 
this popup:
Popups have been proven to be an effective tool for a Subscribe call to action.
Now you might not think of this as a campaign, but it totally is. It’ s a specific 
call-to-action: Sign Up for ModCloth’s Good News & Great Offers!  And 
anytime someone fills out this form, they move on to the next stage in the 
Customer Value Journey.
Often the best marketing campaigns are the simplest.  
Chapter 01: Your Digital Marketing Strategy 
Template (AKA The Customer Value Journey)35Case Study: Honest Company
Campaign Goal:  Engaged to Subscribe to Convert
Content:  Email Copy and Creative
Traffic Source:  Google Adwords
Call to action:  Exclusive Offer! 25% off your first order
Here’s an example of a campaign that moves people through two steps in the 
Value Journey: from Engage to Subscribe and then to Convert.
Let’s go through this campaign from the beginning. The traffic source here is 
Google Adwords targeting the keyword “buy organic diapers.”
Here you can see the AdWords ad:
Attention
When you click on that ad, you arrive on a landing page that asks you to 
subscribe.
Chapter 01: Your Digital Marketing Strategy 
Template (AKA The Customer Value Journey)36
Subscribe
Once you opt in, they’ll send you the following coupon in your email (about 24 
hours later, assuming you didn’t already make a purchase):
Chapter 01: Your Digital Marketing Strategy 
Template (AKA The Customer Value Journey)37
Convert
I want you to pay close attention to that call to action: Exclusive Offer! 25% 
Off Your First Order . Notice that this discount only applies to your first order. 
That’s because the goal of this campaign isn’t to generate repeat purchases; 
it’s to get someone to make their very FIRST purchase. It’s a time-tested and 
effective tactic for turning someone into a new customer.
Chapter 01: Your Digital Marketing Strategy 
Template (AKA The Customer Value Journey)38Summing Up
The Customer Value Journey is the foundation for all the tactics you’ll learn 
in this Guide. Whether you’re learning about content marketing, digital 
advertising, or analytics, or any other topic, keep this concept in mind. 
Don’t worry, though. We’ll review it several times so it stays fresh on your 
mind. And by the end of this Guide, it will likely be cemented into your 
thinking.
Now that you understand the Customer Journey, it’s time to talk about the #1 
tactic you’ll use to engage people at every stage: Content Marketing.

Chapter 02: Developing a Content                  
Marketing Strategy40It’s a big promise: perfect content marketing.
But it is possible if you understand how content fits into your overall digital 
marketing strategy.
And done right, your content marketing will not only attract prospects, but 
also move them through a marketing funnel to drive more sales and grow your 
business.
In this chapter, we cover the basics of a successful content marketing program, 
including methods and metrics, the business roles that should own your 
content marketing, and the lingo you’ll use to talk about it.
Methods of Well-Executed Content Marketing
Let’s start with a thorough understanding of what we mean when we say 
content.
You see, most businesses miss out on a lot of opportunities because their 
vision for content marketing is too small.
As a result, they’re churning out content but not getting great results. And 
here’s why: content in and of itself isn’t what drives traffic and sales.
Your content needs to be “perfect.”
Now, what do we mean by that? 
Perfect content isn’t about you, your brand, or your objectives. It’s about 
delivering the right information to your prospects at exactly the right point in 
the customer journey.CHAPTER
02
Chapter 02: Developing a Content                  
Marketing Strategy41For instance, for the software company Freshbooks, this web page represents 
perfect content marketing for a prospect who needs pricing information to 
make an informed buying decision.
Content is any information that helps you keep the funnel full.
Yep, a pricing page is content .
The big misconception is that content marketing is blogging.
While blogs are a major component of content marketing, they’re only 
a part of the bigger picture. In fact, in most cases, a blog is not the most 
lucrative form of content marketing.
Chapter 02: Developing a Content                  
Marketing Strategy42But we’ll come back to that.
First, let’s get clear on the six characteristics of perfect content marketing and 
why it’s essential that you get started.
(NOTE : At the end of this chapter, you’ll get access to a tool we use to make 
perfect content planning a breeze.)
1. Perfect Content Marketing is Full Funnel
I know this is Marketing 101 stuff,  but stick with me for just a second before I 
get into the more advanced content marketing concepts we’ll be covering.
For an ice-cold prospect to become a customer, they will need to travel 
through three stages:
The 3 stages all prospects go through on their way to becoming a customer
Chapter 02: Developing a Content                  
Marketing Strategy431. Awareness –  The prospect must first become aware  that there is a problem 
and that YOU or your organization have a solution for it. (This is where your 
blog excels.)
2. Evaluation –  Those who move through the Awareness Stage must 
now evaluate the various choices available to them, including your 
competitor’s solutions and, of course, taking no action at all to solve the 
problem.
3. Conversion –  Those that move through the Evaluation Stage are now at 
the moment of truth—purchase. At DigitalMarketer, our goal at this stage is 
to convert  leads into frequent and high-ticket buyers.
A cold prospect cannot evaluate your solution until they are first aware  of the 
problem and your solution. And conversion  is impossible until the prospect 
has first evaluated the possible courses of action.
To move a prospect through a marketing funnel, you need to give them 
content specifically designed to satisfy their needs at each of the thr ee stages.
In other words…
• They need content at the top of the funnel (TOFU) that 
facilitates awareness .
• They need content in the middle of the funnel (MOFU) that facilitates 
evaluation .
• They need content at the bottom of the funnel (BOFU) that facilitates 
conversion .
Make sense?
Blogs are fantastic facilitators of awareness,  but they do a poor job 
of facilitating evaluation and conversion. And, at the risk of pointing out 
the obvious, evaluation and conversion are super critical to your business.
To move prospects through the middle (MOFU) and bottom of the funnel 
(BOFU) you’ll need other content types.
Chapter 02: Developing a Content                  
Marketing Strategy44It looks like this…
We call this  The Content Lifecycle.
Let’s look at each stage of the funnel and the content needed at those 
stages…
Top Of The Funnel (TOFU) Content Marketing
The prospects entering the top of your funnel are completely unaware of your 
solution and, often, completely unaware of their problem.
Chapter 02: Developing a Content                  
Marketing Strategy45As a result, you need content with a low barrier to entry—because at this 
stage, they have little to no motivation to put skin in the game (such as giving 
your contact information or money).
You need freely available content at the top of the funnel (TOFU) that…
• Entertains
• Educates
• or Inspires
… and you need to make it readily available using content types like:
• Blog posts
• Social Media Updates
• Infographics
• Photographs
• Digital Magazines/Books
• Audio/Video Podcasts
• Microsites
• Print Magazines/Newsletters (You’ll need a bigger budget here.)
• Primary Research
Do you need all of these content types at the top of the funnel?
Heck no. 
Chapter 02: Developing a Content                  
Marketing Strategy46Most businesses will post content to a blog and to social media channels like 
Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, Pinterest, etc. Once you’ve mastered these two 
content types, you’ll want to add more top-of-funnel content to the mix, like a 
podcast or a print newsletter.
Remember, the big goal at the top of the funnel is to make prospects 
“problem aware” and “solution aware.”
Notice how Whole Foods, using their Whole Story blog, raises awareness for 
a sea scallops offer while providing valuable content (recipes and cooking 
instructions):
TOFU content raises awareness of your offers while providing valuable information.
Chapter 02: Developing a Content                  
Marketing Strategy47At DigitalMarketer we do that by providing educational content our prospects 
are interested in—and using that content to raise awareness of our training 
products and services.
(Shhhhh… don’t tell anyone, but this VERY chapter is educating you about the 
strategy and tactics taught in our Content Marketing Mastery Certification .) 
And the good news is it works in any industry for any type of product. 
Notice how this kitchen remodeling company uses photographs of remodeled 
kitchens to make prospects “problem aware” and “solution aware”:
With TOFU content, you want to create awareness around problems              
as well as solutions.
Unfortunately, the top of the funnel is where most organizations begin and 
end their content marketing efforts.
Chapter 02: Developing a Content                  
Marketing Strategy48Smart content marketers know that, with a bit more effort, they can move 
prospects from awareness to evaluation in the middle of the funnel.
Here’s how it gets done…
Middle of the Funnel (MOFU) Content Marketing
The big goal in the middle of the funnel is to convert “problem aware” and 
“solution aware” prospects into leads .
Here, we use free content to incentivize prospects to submit their contact 
information and opt in to receive future marketing.
We call this type of content a Lead Magnet .
Lead Magnets can be…
• Educational Resources (Case Study, White Paper, etc.)
• Useful Resources (Swipe File, Checklist, etc.)
• Software Downloads
• Discount/Coupon Clubs
• Quizzes/Surveys
• Webinars/Events
This is a Lead Magnet that DigitalMarketer uses to generate leads for our 
products surrounding Facebook advertising:
Chapter 02: Developing a Content                  
Marketing Strategy49
Lead magnets are free content that incentivize prospects to opt in to           
your list, becoming leads.
When visitors click on the “Download Now” button, they’re prompted to enter 
their email address to receive the piece of content.
This piece of content (a white paper) from Cloud Margin generates “solution 
aware” leads…
Chapter 02: Developing a Content                  
Marketing Strategy50
A white paper or report creates “solution aware” leads.
But you can’t deposit leads in the bank.
A third content type is required at the bottom of the funnel (BOFU) to convert 
leads into customers…
Chapter 02: Developing a Content                  
Marketing Strategy51Bottom of the Funnel (BOFU) Content Marketing
OK, it’s point of sale  time.
What types of content will your new lead need to make an informed purchase 
decision?
Here are a few…
• Demos/Free Trials
• Customer Stories
• Comparison/Spec Sheets
• Webinars/Events
• Mini-Classes
Your lead may be reading your blog and downloading lead magnets (and it 
will help convert her), but you’ll need content that helps her decide between 
you and your competitor to move her through to purchase. 
Notice how Salesforce supplies leads in the bottom of the funnel with 
plenty of customer stories to prove that their product can handle that lead’s 
circumstances…
Chapter 02: Developing a Content                  
Marketing Strategy52
Customer success stories are smart BOFU content.
Salesforce.com has dozens of these customer stories—one for every major 
industry, product offering, and size of business.
Customer stories are content that converts, and they are the responsibility of 
the content marketing team.
Chapter 02: Developing a Content                  
Marketing Strategy53Consider this piece of content designed to assist prospective Quickbooks 
customers in choosing the right solution:
At the bottom of the funnel, prospects are comparison shopping, so 
comparison sheets make smart BOFU content.
But Quickbooks could earn some points by comparing their tools to their 
competitors’ tools as well. For instance, a Google search suggests that a 
comparison sheet between Quickbooks and their competitors (such as Xer o) 
is another piece of content that should be on the radar of the Intuit content 
marketing team.
Chapter 02: Developing a Content                  
Marketing Strategy54
Google’s suggestions are a good source for content ideas.
And while we’re at it, look at all the bottom-of-funnel (BOFU) content Xero’s 
content marketing team has built:
Chapter 02: Developing a Content                  
Marketing Strategy55
Brand comparisons are good BOFU content.
And…
Customer stories are great BOFU content.
Chapter 02: Developing a Content                  
Marketing Strategy56And…
The best BOFU content answers last-minute questions and gives         
prospects a reason to buy.
Is creating top of funnel (TOFU) content on a blog important?
Absolutely.
But failing to build a full-funnel content plan will leave you disappointed in 
your content marketing results.
2. Perfect Content Marketing Is Intent-Based
Some businesses and marketers get hung up on the wrong metrics, 
particularly when it comes to their blog.
Take a look at this video to see what I mean:
Chapter 02: Developing a Content                  
Marketing Strategy57The key to perfect content marketing is understanding existing  intent and 
anticipating future  intent, and then, creating the content “assets” needed to 
address that intent 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
In our Freshbooks example, a customer who’s deep in the funnel might have 
the intent to compare Freshbooks to Quickbooks.
This content asset addresses that intent:

Chapter 02: Developing a Content                  
Marketing Strategy58
To come up with valuable content assets, anticipate current and future needs.
And you’ll have to run paid traffic to your content to maximize your results or 
you risk leaving money on the table as Molly explains:
Chapter 02: Developing a Content                  
Marketing Strategy59The truth is the most lucrative content assets you’ll create (if you have an 
existing business) are assets that meet intent at the bottom and middle of the 
funnel. Optimize for this existing bottom and middle of funnel intent befor e 
going to work on generating awareness at the top of the funnel with an 
expensive and time-consuming blog roll out.
That’s not to diminish the power of a business blog. Over the last 24 months, 
we’ve been adding content assets (articles and podcasts) at the top of the 
funnel and we’ve increased website traffic (think awareness) by 1053%.
That said, the quick wins in the content marketing game are in the middle and 
bottom of the funnel.
3. Perfect Content Marketing Is Ascension Focused
Failure to provide an ascension path from every piece of content you create 
isn’t just bad marketing—it’s a bad user experience.
Smart content marketers anticipate the next logical intent and remove as 
much friction as possible to create a clear path to conversion .
For instance, let’s say I’m shopping for supplies to repaint my kitchen…

Chapter 02: Developing a Content                  
Marketing Strategy60In our Freshbooks pricing page example, notice that Freshbooks has created a 
clear ascension path to a “Risk-Free Trial” of the software.
In blog content, prospects can be given the opportunity to opt-in with their 
email address to get more information about a topic.
Check out this ascension offer embedded in a blog post. Clicking on this 
banner ad will take the prospect to a landing page to enter their email address 
and ascend to a lead:

Chapter 02: Developing a Content                  
Marketing Strategy61
Ascension offers can be embedded in your blog posts.
They get more information about a topic they are interested in. You get a 
lead.
4. Perfect Content Marketing is Segmented
You can run surveys and polls until you’re blue in the face. But you won’t know 
what people are truly interested in until they give you their money or time.
Chapter 02: Developing a Content                  
Marketing Strategy62When a prospect visits a piece of content (spends time) they have raised their 
hand and indicated interest. And, because of the magic of ad retargeting  you 
can follow up with these prospects with a relevant ascension offer without 
even acquiring their contact information.
Retargeting blog visitors can help you create segmented leads.
5. Perfect Content Marketing Is Cross-Channel
Perfect content marketers publish content that meets intent in any channel 
where groups of prospects are searching for and sharing content including:
• Website/blog
• Facebook
• Twitter
• LinkedIn
• Pinterest
• YouTube
Chapter 02: Developing a Content                  
Marketing Strategy63Chances are a single content asset could be published across numerous 
channels to maximize exposure.
For instance, could that video demo of your product be republished on your 
YouTube channel like Cuisinart has done here?

Chapter 02: Developing a Content                  
Marketing Strategy64(If you’re wondering, “Who in the hell would watch that boring video?”  the 
answer is anyone who is interested in buying a coffee grinder and, particularly, 
anyone interested in buying THAT coffee grinder. Anecdotally… I bought that 
coffee grinder after watching that demo just a few weeks ago. The grinder 
does a great job grinding coffee and that video does a great job at cross-
channel content marketing at the bottom of the funnel.) 
Can that article on your blog be repurposed as a webinar? Can that podcast 
become a written article for LinkedIn Pulse? 
6. Perfect Content Marketing Is Avatar-Based
Last, but certainly not least, perfect content marketing assets are produced 
to satisfy the intent of your customer avatars. A content asset can satisfy the 
intent of multiple avatars or it can be published to target a single avatar.
At DigitalMarketer, for example, we produced an article to raise awareness 
(top of the funnel) for our marketing certification programs. This article was 
specifically targeted to our “Employee” avatar who has the intent of acquiring 
skills that will land them a better job.
Chapter 02: Developing a Content                  
Marketing Strategy65
Our goal for this article was to raise awareness for our marketing certification 
programs, so it was targeted to our “Employee” avatar.
Content Marketing Planning: The Content Campaign
To execute perfect content marketing, you need a plan.
At DigitalMarketer, we make this plan at the offer level using a spreadsheet 
called a Content Campaign Plan.
The planning document includes fields for:
• Marketing Funnel  – Is this asset addressing intent at the top, middle , or 
bottom of the funnel?
• Avatar  – Which avatar(s) will this asset target?
Chapter 02: Developing a Content                  
Marketing Strategy66• Vehicle  – Will this be a text, image, video, or audio asset?
• Channel  – Where will this asset be published?
• Ascension Path  – What call-to-action will be used in this asset?
The Content Campaign Plan is used to align content marketing with business 
objectives like generating leads and sales.
It looks like this (I know that’s hard to read, but you can access the template by 
clicking here ).
DigitalMarketer’s Content Campaign Plan
Want to create content that converts prospects at all stages of the funnel? 
Create a Content Campaign Plan and execute on it. It works.
Chapter 02: Developing a Content                  
Marketing Strategy67Your Content Marketing Success Metrics
How do measure the success of your content marketing tactics?
Traffic by Channel
At the top of the funnel, design your marketing to raise awareness for your 
business, brands, and products. Measure traffic from channels like Google, 
Facebook, and Twitter.
Net New MQL ’s
Measure the number of leads generated in the middle of the funnel that 
require further nurturing before they are ready to make a purchase.
Conversion Rate
When content marketing is done correctly, it generates traffic to lead forms 
and product pages. Measure the conversion rate (Page Visits/Conversions) on 
lead forms, product pages, and other calls-to-action.
Net New SQL ’s
Measure the number of leads consuming content at the bottom of the funnel 
(demos, customer stories, etc.), indicating they’re ready to buy.
Relevant Roles in Content Marketing

Chapter 02: Developing a Content                  
Marketing Strategy68Who in your organization should be trained in email marketing?
Three different departments should be proficient at and understand the role of 
email marketing.
Marketing 
Content marketing is a foundational discipline affecting your search, social, 
email, and advertising. Every marketer involved in your digital strategy should 
be well versed in content marketing.
Sales 
According to Harvard Business Review, the average buyer is 57% of the way 
through the sales process before they engage with a sales representative. 
Instead of contacting your sales team your prospects are consuming your 
content. Sales people who understand content marketing can work in 
conjunction with your marketing team to create content that closes deals.
Public Relations
The modern-day PR team must understand how the content they produce fits 
into the larger content, social, and search marketing strategy.
The Lingo You’ll Use as a Content Marketer
What are the terms you need to know as a content marketer?
Top-of-Funnel (TOFU) Content
Content designed to raise awareness for your business, brands and products. 
This content is delivered through a number of channels including blogs, 
podcasts and video hosting platforms like YouTube.
Middle-of-Funnel (MOFU) Content
Content designed to generate leads and move the prospect through the 
evaluation stage. Content in the middle of the funnel often takes the form of a 
Lead Magnet.
Chapter 02: Developing a Content                  
Marketing Strategy69Lead Magnet
An irresistible bribe offering a specific chunk of value to a prospect in 
exchange for their contact information. The goal of the Lead Magnet is to 
maximize the number of targeted leads you are getting for an offer.
Bottom-of-Funnel (BOFU) Content
Content designed to convert a prospect into a customer by providing the 
information needed to make an informed purchase decision. Bottom of funnel 
content includes webinars, product demonstrations, and customer stories.
Summing Up
Content marketing isn’t restricted to blogging. You’ll probably create tons of 
blog posts, but if you’re strategic, you’ll use your blog as just one channel in 
your content campaigns.
Remember, content marketing works with your other digital tactics in a 
comprehensive marketing plan designed to move people deliberately through 
your Customer Value Journey.
Don’t forget to download the Content Campaign Plan, which is your best 
resource for planning content for every stage of the funnel: TOFU, MOFU, and 
BOFU.
Then, once you’ve got your content assets built, you’re ready to learn how to 
use digital advertising to drive traffic and conversions.
Chapter 02: Developing a Content                  
Marketing Strategy70Become a Content Marketing Specialist
Content marketing is an essential aspect of any modern digital marketing 
strategy. In this mastery course, you’ll learn to execute a “full funnel” content 
strategy that transforms ice cold prospects at the top of the funnel (TOFU) into 
loyal buyers of even your most expensive products and services at the bottom 
of the funnel (BOFU). 
You’ll learn:
• How to create your Customer Avatar so you can architect a content 
strategy that attracts leads and buyers.
• Choose from 12 goals, 16 metrics, and 21 different types of content to 
create a content strategy that is laser focused on moving the needle for 
your organization. (Building this content plan is a snap using our Content 
Marketing Plan worksheets.)
• The “GC = A” Content Marketing Formula that connects the dots between 
content and sales.
Click Here to Learn More »

Chapter 03: Crafting a Digital
Advertising Plan72One of our biggest challenges as digital marketers is traffic.
How can we easily and affordably get people’s attention, push them to our 
websites, and convert them to subscribers and customers?
The secret is digital advertising. And if you understand how to make it work, it 
can give you full control over your traffic flow and help you sell more too.
In this chapter, you’ll learn the process for planning, setting up, and optimizing 
your ads, including the metrics you need to watch, the lingo you’ll use as a 
media buyer, and the people in your business who should be responsible for 
digital advertising.
But before we start, let’s get clear about why paid traffic is a smarter 
investment than organic.
The Difference Between Paid and Organic Traffic
Free traffic is always the goal, right? Which is why most businesses aim for 
organic traffic first. After all, if you can get a steady flow of free traffic, you’ll 
pocket the savings.
But as with everything else in life, you get what you pay for. 
The easiest way to explain that is with a simple comparison: the water hose 
versus the rain.
Paid traffic is like a water hose. You have complete control over the direction 
it’s pointed, the amount of water pouring from it, and how long you let the 
water flow. You can turn it on and off whenever you want. 
If you’re getting more traffic than you need, with paid traffic, you can slow the 
flow. You have control of where it’s going, how fast, and when. CHAPTER
03
Chapter 03: Crafting a Digital
Advertising Plan73Organic traffic, on the other hand, is more like rain. You aren’t sure when or 
if it will come, how consistent it will be, nor how long it will last. Listen to the 
weather channel all you want. You have no control.
With organic traffic, you can lose traffic if Google changes their algorithm. If a 
competitor has a huge launch, you could lose traffic to them. You also have no 
control over where the traffic goes. Even simple things like changing the URL 
of your landing page can mess things up.
You can enjoy all the control of paid traffic without it actually costing you 
anything. You do that by building funnels that reimburse your ad spend. 
So in essence, you can acquire customers for free, and then once your 
advertising costs have been reimbursed, use simple tactics to build loyalty and 
optimize your customers’ lifetime value.
Better still, it’s not an either/or proposition. 
The better your paid traffic is, the better your organic traffic will be as well, 
because good advertising drives traffic—and the pages that get lots of traffic 
tend to rank higher in search engines. 
That creates an upward spiral of traffic acquisition. A win-win, if you will.
But it’s important to be realistic. You just can’t run one traffic campaign and 
expect it to magically deposit a million dollars in your bank account. 
If you want a constant flow of leads and customers for your business, you must 
look at this as a system.
Top 3 Sources for Paid Traffic
Some of the best platforms for paid traffic are Facebook, Google, YouTube, 
Pinterest, LinkedIn, and Twitter. 
Chapter 03: Crafting a Digital
Advertising Plan74But to know which one is right for you, you need to know where your 
customers hang out and which ad platforms are suited for the type of 
marketing you do.
In most cases, you’ll probably start with Facebook and Google. According to 
Business Insider, these two sites drive 80% of referral traffic, more than all the 
other platforms combined. 
Facebook and Google are your top sources for paid traffic
But again, it depends on what you’re trying to do.
Google Is Like the Yellow Pages
Because Google is a search engine, people start there when they’re looking 
for information. So it’s a lot like the Yellow Pages. 
Chapter 03: Crafting a Digital
Advertising Plan75To drive traffic through Google, you’ll bid on keywords that will help people 
find you and can lead to an ideal sales conversation.
Facebook Is Like a Billboard
Scrolling through your Facebook newsfeed is a bit like driving down the 
highway. As you scroll, you see ads, promoted posts, as well as random 
comments. 
And if you, as a business, are willing to pay, your message will also appear in 
the newsfeed of your target audience.
With Facebook, you can spend as little as you want and still expand your 
reach. 
Because it’s a social platform, and because they collect data on our behavior 
every day, they know a lot about us. All that data makes them the most 
powerful ad platform available today. 
Target your ads precisely enough, and you’re sure to get the right eyeballs on 
your message.
YouTube Is Like Television 
YouTube’s top metric is the number of minutes watched. Their goal is to 
keep you on the site consuming videos, so they operate a lot like traditional 
television, playing ads in the videos, interrupting people’s viewing. 
Disruptive, yes, but with YouTube, your ads are always relevant. 
That’s because you can target your ads based on the YouTube channels your 
audience likes, the types of videos they watch, and what they’re searching for.
So what are the top 3 paid traffic sources? What’s the best place to start with 
your paid traffic campaigns? 
Facebook, Google, and YouTube: All three will give you quality traffic from 
people who are interested in your offers. 
Chapter 03: Crafting a Digital
Advertising Plan76Okay, that gives you a good background for the strategy we’re about to 
discuss. Let’s dig into the methods you’ll use to execute a winning ad strategy.
Methods of Well-Executed Digital Advertising 
We’ve established that paid traffic is your best (and most cost effective) way 
to drive traffic. Now let’s talk about how to create ads that magnetically attract 
your best customers. 
NOTE : We’ll focus primarily on Facebook advertising here, but you can apply 
this same process to whatever platform you’re using.
Two Concepts for Evaluating Your Target Audience
How do you know the type of ads you should be running and how to precisely 
target those ads? It comes down to 2 foundational concepts: the customer 
journey and traffic “temperature.”
Concept 1: The Customer Journey
The Customer Value Journey, remember, is the path people follow as they 
build relationship with your business, from first touch to final sale. 
The three core stages of this Journey are:
Awareness.  This is the top of the funnel, when new prospects first discover 
your brand exists and that you can help them solve their problems.
Evaluation.  This is the middle of the funnel, when prospects are seriously 
considering making a purchase. Their biggest question is whether you’re the 
best source.
Conversion.  The is the bottom of the funnel, where people take action and 
buy something from you.  
Chapter 03: Crafting a Digital
Advertising Plan77
The 3 stages of the Customer Journey
Concept 2: Traffic Temperature
At each stage of the Customer Journey, your audience has a different 
relationship with you. At the top of the funnel, they barely know you and may 
not even know what you do. But as they move through the funnel, they learn 
more about you and become more committed and loyal. 
You might say, they “warm up to you.” Which is why we refer to this 
deepening relationship as “traffic temperature.” 
Chapter 03: Crafting a Digital
Advertising Plan78
Traffic comes in 3 distinct “temperatures,” and each aligns with a different 
stage of the Customer Journey.
Cold Traffic. Generally, this is new traffic from people who are in the 
Awareness stage. These people are good prospects for your business but 
have never heard of you or your brand.
Your goal with cold traffic is indoctrination. You want to introduce your 
business to new audiences and get them coming back for more.
Warm Traffic.  Warm traffic comes from people who know who you are but 
haven’t bought anything yet. It aligns with the Evaluation stage.
Your goal with warm traffic is acquisition, to convert a site visitor into a lead. 
Chapter 03: Crafting a Digital
Advertising Plan79Hot Traffic.  Hot traffic comes from people who are at the Conversion stage. 
These are your buyers, people who are ready to buy or have already bought 
something from you. 
Your goal with hot traffic is monetization, to sell a high-dollar product to your 
best customers. 
Ultimately, your goal is to move people from cold to hot , transforming new 
leads into loyal customers, willing to buy from you over and over again.
You do that by matching your message to a prospect’s temperature. 
With cold traffic, you don’t necessarily offer a sale. You’ll spend more time 
building relationship. Whereas with hot traffic, the relationship is secure. You 
speak more as a friend, and you make offers based on the topics you know 
they’re interested in.
Believe it or not, these 2 concepts alone will massively improve your ability to 
create successful traffic campaigns. Simply relating to people based on their 
temperature, you’ll build trust and engagement.
Now let’s move to the 5 elements that make up a winning ad campaign.
The 5 Elements of a High-Performing Campaign
Every ad campaign is made up of 5 key elements: the offer itself, the ad’s copy 
and design (which we call the “creative”), the ad scent (the cohesive look and 
feel of your overall campaign), and the targeting, or who you pitch your offer 
to.  
1. Your Offer 
Your offer is not the same thing as your product or service. Your business is 
built around a product; your ad campaign is built around an offer.
So what is an offer? It’s the unique combination of your product or service with 
other bonuses or add-ons, including all the details of your promotion: 
Chapter 03: Crafting a Digital
Advertising Plan80• The deliverables
• The price
• The schedule
• How it’s being delivered
• And more
So you may only have one product, but you can offer it for sale in a variety of 
ways, creating hundreds of different offers. 
This example, for instance, offers a coupon for big savings on your first visit:
Coupons make great offers based on saving money.

Chapter 03: Crafting a Digital
Advertising Plan81This one, from Survival Life, offers a valuable product for just a penny:
Another appealing offer: a valuable product at a huge cost savings.
Your offer is also the starting point for your ad campaign. Get it right, and 
everything else will usually fall into place. 
But the opposite is just as true: put together a bad offer, and your ad won’t 
convert.
Chapter 03: Crafting a Digital
Advertising Plan822. Your Copy
Your ad copy refers to the messaging you use in your ad campaign. It should 
be clear and compelling, so the benefits stand out—both the benefits of 
engaging with the ad and of taking whatever action you’re asking for. 
Good copy has a strong emotional hook. It’s intriguing and persuasive without 
relying on hype.
Generally, you want to start your ad by speaking to a pain point your target is 
dealing with. Then your offer should be presented as the solution.
This Hired promotion leads with the problem: “counting down the hours until 
you get to leave the office.” If someone resonates with that problem, they’ll 
be eager to see the solution.

Chapter 03: Crafting a Digital
Advertising Plan83Or take this example from WINC:
If going to the store is a pain point, they hook your interest in the very first line.
3. The Creative
Creative refers to the graphic elements of your ad: the image, video, or 
carousel images. 
Don’t be fooled by the term “creative.” It doesn’t have to be overly 
imaginative. Good creative communicates your message visually in just a 
second or two. So it supports and enhances your copy. 
Here at DigitalMarketer, we like to be literal with our ad creative. Whenever 
possible, we visually display the offer, so people know at a glance what the 
deliverable is. 
Chapter 03: Crafting a Digital
Advertising Plan84Take this ad as an example. The article we promoted the offer in is on the left, 
and the resulting ad is on the right.
Your creative should communicate your message visually in 1-2 seconds.
Or this one where we promoted our 60-Second Blog Plan:
“Literal” creative communicates clearly.
Chapter 03: Crafting a Digital
Advertising Plan85In both cases, the creative is literal, depicting—as closely as possible—the 
download we’re offering.
4. Ad Scent
Ad scent refers to congruency, or “sameness,” throughout your campaign. 
Why is this important?
Because trust is a huge conversion factor. If people feel comfortable that your 
offer is valid, they’ll seriously consider your offer. Do anything to create doubt 
or fear, and they’ll exit without taking action.
Here’s how ad scent works…
Ad scent
Chapter 03: Crafting a Digital
Advertising Plan86Every time we click, we use simple visual cues (or scent) to ensur e we’re in the 
right place. If we lose scent at any point, we begin to feel we’re in the wrong 
place or that we’re being tricked. As soon as that happens, we exit and go 
back to where we started.
Your visitors should always feel like they’re on the right path. 
You do this by creating a flow—visually, in your messaging, and in the 
presentation of your offer—from your ad to your landing page, and every 
other piece of your campaign.
To create congruency, focus on 3 elements: 
• Design: Use similar imagery and colors on each piece of the campaign.
• Messaging: Use similar phrases and benefits.
• Offer: Your offer should be the same throughout. 
Ad scent is low-hanging fruit in digital advertising. Get it right, and you’ll boost 
your conversion rate and lower costs.
See how Whole Foods does it in this ad:
Whole Foods maintains good scent.
Chapter 03: Crafting a Digital
Advertising Plan87The ad mentions “FREE Instacart delivery,” and when they click, they land on a 
page with similar wording in the headline: “Free Delivery Credit.”
If the landing page talked about keeping your fruit fresh or any other topic 
unrelated to free delivery, it would confuse people, and they’d click off without 
taking action.
That’s why it’s important to create a strong scent between the elements of your 
campaign.
5. Targeting
The final element in a high-performing ad campaign is targeting, and it’s 
important because even a great offer won’t convert if you put it in front of the 
wrong audience.
Follow 2 rules of thumb when planning your targeting. 
First, be as specific as possible.
Specificity has to do with research. When planning your targeting, learn as 
much as possible about your target audience. You want to know your target 
audience so well, you can single out specific interests that this group has but 
no one else would have. 
Second, get the message right for your target temperature.
Temperature, as we talked about earlier, has to do with matching your 
message to the level of relationship you have with your target audience.
Here are some guidelines for getting the temperature right.
Cold Traffic.  Here, you’re just introducing yourself to new audiences, so you 
have 3 goals (none of them being to sell):
• Indoctrination. Aim to build trust and establish credibility by sharing 
valuable information for free.
• Pixelling. When they arrive on your content, pixel them so you run mor e 
ads to them and warm them up. 
Chapter 03: Crafting a Digital
Advertising Plan88• Segmentation. If they click on a blog post about email marketing, we know 
they’re interested in that topic, so we can make them a more relevant offer 
later.
What kind of offers do you make to cold traffic?
• Blog posts
• Social media updates
• Content videos
• Podcasts
• Lead magnets
• Quizzes
• White papers
• YouTube ads to content
• Twitter ads to pillar content
• Infographics
When paying for cold traffic, you’ll pixel people who engage with your ad or 
click through to free content. You want to give them value so they begin to like 
your brand. So focus on entertaining, inspiring, and educating everyone who 
clicks through.
Warm Traffic.  Think about warm traffic as acquaintances who have shown 
interest in return. It’s not a developed relationship yet, but there has been a 
connection. So you’ll target these ads to:
• Leads that opted into your email list. (You’ll upload that list to a traffic 
platform.)
Chapter 03: Crafting a Digital
Advertising Plan89• People who have visited your website and been pixeled.
• Facebook fans, Twitter followers, YouTube channel subscribers, etc.
Your goals for warm traffic are to:
• Generate leads
• Drive low-dollar sales
• What kind of offers do you make to warm traffic?
• Lead magnets
• Quizzes or surveys
• Free or paid webinars
• Flash sales/low-dollar offers
• Product demos
• Branding videos
• Books (free or paid)
• Free trials
Hot Traffic.  These are your buyers. They may be people who have opted 
in and are on the fence about buying from you. They may have added 
products to the shopping cart but never purchased. They may have purchased 
something from you in the past but haven’t responded to recent offers. 
Your goals in running ads to this group are:
• Activation. If they haven’t purchased in a while, remind them that you’re 
still there.
Chapter 03: Crafting a Digital
Advertising Plan90• High-dollar sales. Upsell buyers of lower-priced products.
What kind of offers do you make to hot traffic?
• Events
• Paid webinars
• High-dollar offers
• Done-for-you services
Cold, warm, or hot, getting the temperature right allows you to put your 
campaign in front of the right people. And the more precisely you can target 
your ads, the better they’ll perform.
Now let’s talk about…
Creating an Ad Campaign
How do you put all these concepts and elements together to create a 
successful ad campaign?
The secret is to create everything in advance—all the copy, creative, and 
targeting—before trying to set up your campaigns. The idea is to create 
precisely targeted ads that speak directed to your target audience. And for 
that, we use the Ad Grid.
Ad Grid: From Strategy to Scale
The ad grid is a strategic approach to creating campaigns that perfectly align 
with the temperature and interests of the people you’re targeting.
The idea is to identify in advance the types of people you’re targeting and the 
hooks that are most likely to grab their attention, so you can be sure you’re 
creating a good marketing/message fit.
You’ll create your ad grid in Excel or a Google Sheet, but it will look something 
like this:
Chapter 03: Crafting a Digital
Advertising Plan91
The Ad Grid helps you create highly targeted ads. Create a different ad grid 
for every campaign you put together.
Now, with your spreadsheet ready, here are the 7 steps you’ll go through to 
plan, implement, and scale your campaign.
Step 1: Identify your avatars
An avatar is a profile for one type of person who’d be interested in your offer 
(example: entrepreneur, stay-at-home mom, consultant). The avatars for your 
campaign may be different from the avatars for your business, and that’s okay. 
For each traffic campaign, you’ll have 2-4 different avatars. You can have more, 
of course, but the more avatars you have, the more work it will take to plan 
your campaign.
To figure out who your best avatars are, look at your offer (e.g., the lead 
magnet, blog post, or webinar you’re promoting) and brainstorm several 
different types of people who’d want it and benefit from it. 
Chapter 03: Crafting a Digital
Advertising Plan92Each of these will be an avatar for your campaign. Plug them into the top row 
of your grid.
Step 2: Identify the hooks
What’s most appealing about your offer? Each benefit or outcome of your offer 
can be turned into a hook to grab the attention of your audience.
Generally, you’ll create hooks based on these 6 outcomes. 
• Have.  What will they have if they download and consume your offer? How 
do their lives look before & after?
• Feel.  How will they feel better, smarter, or more successful for accepting 
your offer?
• Average day.  How did you change or improve their average day? 
• Status . How do people elevate in status or become a better person after 
consuming your offer?
• Proof/results.  What social proof, case studies, or testimonials validate your 
offer? How can you promote the sense of belonging that people will get 
from joining other people who’ve responded?
• Speed  and automation.  Speak to the time savings or quickness of learning 
or applying the information in your offer.
Don’t feel like you need to create a hook for all these outcomes. But do be 
creative and come up with several benefits or outcomes that will grab the 
attention of your avatars.
Okay, now that you have your hooks, enter them in the first column of your 
grid.
Step 3: Create your ad copy
You need segmented messaging for every cell in your spreadsheet, each 
targeting one hook and avatar. 
Chapter 03: Crafting a Digital
Advertising Plan93You can write the ad copy yourself or, because the ad grid clearly 
communicates the avatars and hooks you’re targeting, you can outsource it to 
a copywriter.
Regardless of who does the writing, though, you want unique ad copy for 
every segment: Avatar1/Hook1, Avatar 2/Hook1, etc. And for each segment, 
you want the copy for the entire ad: text, headline, description and ad type.
So let’s say you have 4 avatars and 5 hooks, you’ll need to write 20 ads.
Your Ad Grid tells you how much copy you need to write.
This level of segmentation gives you the best chance of success in your 
campaign. Instead of creating generic ads for a few avatars or hooks, you’ll 
create highly targeted ads aimed at specific types of people (avatars) with 
specific interests (hooks). 
With this approach, your odds of getting a good return on your ad spend are 
incrementally higher!
Chapter 03: Crafting a Digital
Advertising Plan94
A completed ad grid with unique ad copy for every avatar and every hook
Step 4: Avatar Research
Once your copy is written, it’s time to research your avatars to identify the 
interest groups you’ll use in your ads.
For this, research each avatar separately, finding the answers to each of these 
questions: 
• Who are the authority figures, thought leaders, or big brands in your 
niche?
• What books/magazines/newspapers does your ideal customer read?
• What events do they attend?
Chapter 03: Crafting a Digital
Advertising Plan95• What websites do they frequent?
• Where do they live?
• What tools do they use?
• What’s specifically unique about this group?
To find the answers, do a Google search and ask people in your target 
audience. It may take time to find the answers, but these answers will help you 
get your ads in front of the people who need to see them. So take the time to 
do it right!
You should also use this little-known technique…
We call it the “But No One Else Would” trick, and here’s how it works.
Let’s say you’re targeting an ad to golfers. You want to find interests that only 
avid golfers would know about, so no one will click on your ad except qualified 
prospects.

Chapter 03: Crafting a Digital
Advertising Plan96Even casual golfers would likely know who Tiger Woods and Phil Mickelson 
are, but only avid golf enthusiasts would know Bubba Watson. So when setting 
up your ad, you’d want to target people interested in Bubba Watson.
This is what you’re looking for in your avatar research: the interests that only 
die-hard fans would know about, so you can get the right eyeballs on your ads.
Step 5: Create or Outsource Ad Creatives
Your creative is the visual element you’ll use in each ad. At a minimum, you 
need one creative for each hook. 
What should your creatives look like?
Do a Google image search of each hook’s keywords, and see what comes up. 
Images for the Google search “golf tips”
Chapter 03: Crafting a Digital
Advertising Plan97The top-ranking images show you what people think about when they hear 
your keyword. 
Use that as inspiration. But don’t copy. Design original images or videos that 
include the imagery people associate with your keyword—but that also have 
your brand’s unique look and feel. 
Step 6: Set up your ads and compile your results
At this point, you have all the assets you need for your ad campaigns. It’s time 
to set up your ads. Use the ad grid to help you build each ad:
• Use the avatar for your targeting.
• Use the copy and creative you’ve developed to build the ads.
• Use your avatar interests to build an audience size in the range of half a 
million to 1.5 million each.
Then turn your ads on and run them about a week. Once you start getting 
results, you can begin gathering your metrics.
Your best success metric depends on the purpose of your campaign and the 
temperature you’re targeting. It might be:
• cost per click
• cost per 1,000 impressions
• cost per acquisition
• ROI
• Or some other metric that reflects your success
Record that metric in your ad grid below the ad copy for each avatar/hook. 
Ideally, you’ll collect the metrics at 7 days, 14 days, 21 days, and at the end of 
the campaign.
Chapter 03: Crafting a Digital
Advertising Plan98Step 7: Scale
Scaling is about figuring out what’s working, what’s not, and how you can get 
bigger, better results. 
There are 2 ways to scale a campaign:
• Horizontally : If your results for an avatar are better than average, buy 
traffic in on other ad platforms to boost your visibility to that group of 
people. 
• Vertically : If a specific hook or avatar is working especially well, create 
more ad sets to that group on the same platform.
Find your winning avatar and hooks, and scale those. But also refine your 
process so you get better results in less time with a smaller investment of time 
or money.
Optimizing Your Process
In digital advertising, your goal is to attract cold traffic, then war m it up over 
time, so you can effectively attract new people to your website, get them to 
opt in, and persuade them to buy.  
To do that, you’ll build campaigns that include ads for all temperatures of your 
target audience. The challenge is to stay within your budget while targeting 
different segments. Here’s how to optimize your ad spend.
Your formula for success is
6:3:1
Let’s assume your budget allows you to spend $10 a day. Your daily spend will 
look like this:
• $6/day on cold traffic, driving cold traffic to your site with pur e content
• $3/day turning warm traffic into leads or buyers 
Chapter 03: Crafting a Digital
Advertising Plan99• $1/day retargeting and selling a higher-dollar product
That ratio may change periodically depending on your needs, but this is a 
good balance, allowing you to target all temperatures while maintaining 
control of your spending.
Optimizing your Ads
When targeting different temperatures, you need to adapt your ads to the 
level of relationship. These templates will give you a good head start.
Cold Traffic Ad
Chapter 03: Crafting a Digital
Advertising Plan100
Warm Traffic Ad
Hot Traffic Ad
Optimizing a Weak Campaign
If a campaign isn’t performing well, go back to your offer. If you have a 
powerful offer, your other elements can be weak and the ads will still work. But 
if your offer isn’t right, nothing else matters.
In some cases, your ads will start out strong, but results will wane over time. 
Chapter 03: Crafting a Digital
Advertising Plan101When this happens, it usually means ad fatigue has set in. People have seen 
the ad too many times and aren’t responding to it anymore. 
You can fix ad fatigue in 2 ways: 
1. Retarget to another audience.
2. Change out the campaign.
The Lingo: The Language of Digital Advertising
What are the terms you need to know as a digital advertiser?
Traffic Temperature
The classification of the audiences you target with your digital advertising 
campaigns as cold, warm, or hot.
Cold Traffic
Audiences targeted with ads that have no prior experience with your brands, 
products, or people. Ads targeted at cold audiences introduce the business to 
the prospect and establish trust and authority in an effort to build awareness.
Warm Traffic
Audiences targeted with ads that are aware of your brands, products, or 
people but have not yet converted to a customer or haven’t purchased in a 
long period of time. Ads targeted at warm audiences should be designed to 
convince a prospect that you have the superior solution.
Hot Traffic
Audiences targeted with ads that have previously purchased. These audiences 
know your reputation and have used your product or service. Ads targeted at 
hot audiences should convert a customer into a high-ticket or repeat buyer. 
Most ad campaigns to hot audiences will be conducted through retargeting.
Chapter 03: Crafting a Digital
Advertising Plan102Retargeting Campaign
An ad campaign designed to reach customers and prospects with a message 
and offer that is based on their previous behavior. That behavior might be 
an opt-in to a lead form, a purchase, or a visit to a page on your website. Ad 
retargeting is available from ad platforms such as Facebook and Google.
Frequency
How many times has an ad been shown to the people you’re targeting. Ideally, 
you want to keep the frequency below 10. If people to see the same ad too 
many times, it becomes annoying and can lead to ad fatigue.
Relevance
The Facebook metric calculating how relevant your ad is to your target 
audience. In Google Adwords, it’s called “quality score.” It measures people’s 
engagement level and how much they like your ad. 
The Metrics You’ll Use to Measure Success
What are the metrics you need to watch as a digital advertiser?
Click-Through Rate (CTR)
The number of clicks divided by the number of impressions on an ad and any 
other call-to-action. The higher the click-through rate, the more prospects you 
will be moving from stage to stage in the customer journey.
Cost Per Acquisition of Customer (CPA)
The amount of advertising spend divided by the number of customers 
generated. Drill down on this metric by calculating CPA by by traffic campaign, 
traffic source, and more.
Cost Per Lead (CPL)
The amount of advertising spend divided by the number of leads generated. 
Once again, drill down on this metric by calculating CPL by traffic campaign, 
traffic source, and more.
Chapter 03: Crafting a Digital
Advertising Plan103Cost Per Click (CPC)
The amount of advertising spend divided by the number of clicks on the ad, 
ad set, or ad campaign. Believe it or not, this is the least important of these 
four metrics.
Cost Per 1,000 Impressions (CPM)
The amount it costs to reach a million people. When you’re creating a 
campaign to extend your reach or build brand awareness, this is the metric to 
use. 
The Roles: Who Has Responsibility for Digital Advertising?
 
Who should own your digital advertising? Where in the company does 
responsibility lie?
Media Buyer / Paid Traffic Specialist
The paid traffic team (or individual) should have primary responsibility for 
setting up and deploying your digital advertising. 
They’ll rely on input from other teams and individuals within the organization, 
especially from designers for creating the ad graphics and landing pages, 
marketing and sales for creating compelling offers, and content marketing for 
finding great content to direct cold traffic to.
Chapter 03: Crafting a Digital
Advertising Plan104Marketing & Sales
As the competition for attention continues to increase online, all marketing 
teams must learn to buy traffic at a positive return on ad spend.
Content Marketing
Any team member who is producing content (blogs, podcasts, videos, press 
releases, etc.) must understand how that content can be leveraged by a paid 
traffic specialist.
Data & Analytics
To produce a positive return on ad spend, a paid traffic team needs access to 
an analyst that understands the goals and processes involved in buying traffic.
Summing Up
Digital advertising is a key tactic for digital marketers because it gives you 
control over your traffic flow. 
To succeed, though, you need to create different campaigns for each stage 
of the Customer Journey—and you need to understand the “temperature” of 
each stage. Get that right, and you’ll soon be driving traffic like a pr o.
But your digital marketing mastery doesn’t stop there. Not only do you want 
to be driving traffic to your onsite content and landing pages, you also want to 
engage your audience in social media. And that’s just what we’ll cover in the 
next chapter.
Chapter 03: Crafting a Digital
Advertising Plan105Become a Digital Advertising Specialist
Companies today must have scalable traffic campaigns that produce new, 
qualified customers from scratch if they want consistent growth. 
In this mastery course, you’ll gain the skills you need to help brands and 
businesses leverage paid traffic channels such as Google, Facebook, T witter, 
YouTube and other demand-gen platforms to grow their customer base...
without breaking the bank.
Click Here to Learn More »

Chapter 04: Developing a Social
Media Strategy107If marketing is about putting your message where your audience hangs out 
(which it is), then social media is a no brainer.
That said, many businesses fail to fully leverage social media in their marketing 
plans. They dabble, sure, but their strategic efforts end with content and 
advertising.
That’s a big mistake, and here’s why…
Today, 79% of US internet users are on Facebook. Six out of ten Americans 
stay updated on news through social media , while 35% have used social 
media to look for or research a job .  
And these same numbers are reflected worldwide. Is it any wonder marketers 
are going social to grow their business?
SourceCHAPTER
04
Chapter 04: Developing a Social
Media Strategy108Trouble is that “going social” isn’t as easy as it looks. There’s a lot more to 
social media marketing than simply posting to Facebook and Twitter.
In this chapter, we cover the basics of a successful social media program, 
including methods and metrics, the business roles that should own your social 
media marketing, and the lingo you’ll use to talk about it.
Keep in mind, there’s a big difference between a social media manager and a 
community manager. (Yes, both manage social media efforts, but their focus 
is different.) Learn more in our article, Social Media Manager vs. Community 
Manager . 
Methods of Well-Executed Social Media Marketing
There are 4 stages in a successful social cycle:
• Listening
• Influencing
• Networking
• Selling 
Chapter 04: Developing a Social
Media Strategy109
The social success cycle has 4 stages, beginning with listening.
All 4 of these stages are key to reaching social media success. But all of it 
hinges on Stage 1: Social Listening.
Listening gives you the insights you need to perform the other 3 stages well. 
It helps you develop a strategy that will give you influence, a str ong network, 
and lots of leads and sales.
The key, of course, is to get your information in front of your prospects and 
customers where they hang out online.  For most businesses, that includes one 
or more of these top social networking sites.
Chapter 04: Developing a Social
Media Strategy110
Source
If you’re worried about the time drain that social media can be, don’t worry. 
Social media marketing isn’t about hanging out with your prospects and 
customers. It’s about executing the social cycle while minimizing costs—which 
means you need to master the methods and metrics for all 4 of the stages.
1. Social Listening 
As with any marketing strategy, you need to start with your target audience. 
That’s why social media marketing starts with listening.
This is key to creating a successful social strategy.
Chapter 04: Developing a Social
Media Strategy111Whether you’re paying attention or not, people are talking about you and 
reaching out to you on the social web. They’re sharing their experiences with 
your products. They’re talking about the things you’re saying or doing. They’re 
even asking you questions.
Whether you’re paying attention or not, people are talking about you on the 
social web.
Some comments, like these, are positive. You’ll want to celebrate them—and 
respond with a great big thank-you. 
Chapter 04: Developing a Social
Media Strategy112
Negative comments need immediate attention.
Other comments aren’t so positive (and some are downright negative). They 
need immediate attention so followers know you’re present and accessible.
It’s a lot like customer support. And in the same way, it can help or hurt your 
public perception.
Every day, your social phone is ringing. 
If you don’t answer, it leaves a bad impression. On the social web, it’s a bit like 
leaving your customer service lines unattended. 
But when you do answer the call, listening and responding appropriately, you 
can connect with your fans and followers, find and fix issues you may not be 
aware of, and build incredible good will. 
The key, of course, is to make listening your #1 priority and use your insights 
to inform the other 3 stages of the social success cycle.
Chapter 04: Developing a Social
Media Strategy113Goals of Social Listening
What are you listening for? When tuning in to social conversations, your goals 
are to:
• Track public perception of your brand.
• Identify the topics you need to be talking about.
• Keep a pulse on the industry, where it’s going, how it’s being perceived.
• Perform customer research.
• Conduct competitive research.
When social listening, you’re tuning into 5 key bits of information.
Chapter 04: Developing a Social
Media Strategy114In particular, pay attention to these 5 things:
• Your brand  – Watch for mentions of your company name, your products, 
or any other identifying information.
Example : Apple might watch for mentions of the Apple watch or anything 
related to iOS.
• Topics relevant to your industry  – You want to stay on top of the pulse 
of your industry. So listen to the topics people are bringing up, their 
questions, and their hot buttons. 
Example : Apple might follow conversations around wearable tech or 
smartphone cameras. 
• Your competitors  – What’s being said about them? Is it positive or 
negative? And what are your competitors saying about you?
Example : Apple’s competitors might be Android or Jeff Bezos. They’d be 
wise to watch for mentions of them.
• Influencers  – Listen for the topics thought leaders and influencers are 
talking about, and look at the content they’re producing. They’re all clues 
for where the industry is moving.
Example : Apple should probably keep an eye on GigaONE and John 
Gruber.
• Public facing people in your company  – Watch for mentions of your 
leaders and influencers. What’s being said? Is it positive or negative? 
Example : Mentions of Tim Cook and Arthur Levinson can reveal public 
perception of the Apple brand.
Your aim is to tune into the pulse of public sentiment towards your brand, your 
industry, and the topics that relate to your brand. In a sense, it’s reputation 
management. But it can also help you perform real-time customer service and 
identify product or content gaps that need to be filled.
Chapter 04: Developing a Social
Media Strategy115Putting Your Listening to Work
Listening is only half of the equation. You also need to respond to the things 
you see and hear. 
A strategic “feedback loop” is the best way to do this. 
What is a feedback loop?  It’s a process you create for your teams to use 
when addressing issues that arise during social listening. It clearly maps out 
the people or departments that issues should be routed to and who has 
responsibility for resolving them.
Here’s how it works… 
You put a social media manager (or team member) in place, actively listening. 
When your social listener sees a complaint or issue, say in Twitter, they’ll 
perform “triage”—responding with an empathetic “you’ve been heard” 
response—and then route the issue to the proper team. This happens within 
12 hours of the complaint/issue.
Chapter 04: Developing a Social
Media Strategy116Once the issue has been forwarded to the appropriate person, this specialist 
will then respond to the issue, aiming to resolve it completely within 24 hours. 
Here’s why it works…
Having a social media listener is well and good, but in the real world, they 
often don’t have the specialized knowledge or authority to resolve the issues 
that will arise. And sometimes they don’t know who should take care of those 
issues, either. 
That’s how issues get overlooked and forgotten, resulting in untold damage to 
your brand.
But with your feedback loop, that won’t happen. This flowchart clearly maps 
out the most appropriate departments for resolving different issues. For 
example:
• Who in Customer Care will handle customer service issues.
• Who on the Content team will handle content issues.
• Who on the Product team will handle product issues.
So your social listener knows exactly who to alert when issues arise, and your 
social media team is able to quickly respond to anything they see.
Let’s break this down into 3 basic steps.
The 3-Step Social Customer Service Plan
For social media marketing to work, you need to make it human and authentic. 
Even when you’re dealing with a complaint, your aim is to align yourself with 
the person, de-escalate the situation, and provide a compassionate, human 
touch.
Here’s the 3-step process for doing that:
1. Respond quickly.  Social media moves quickly. Make sure you perform 
triage within 12 hours and resolve issues within 24 hours.
Chapter 04: Developing a Social
Media Strategy1172. Empathize.  Make an empathetic statement as soon as possible: “I’m sorry 
you ran into this,” “I know this is frustrating,” or “I can understand how 
important this is to you.”  
3. Move it to a private channel.  If you can’t solve the issue in a sentence or 
two, take it off public channels. Private messaging, email, or a phone call 
allow you to talk in detail without the rest of your followers adding their two 
cents to the discussion.
This approach demonstrates that you’re listening. It also allows you to express 
compassion. And by moving the conversation to a private channel, you make 
people feel as if you’re committed to giving them a real solution.
Metrics to Watch
What should you measure to track your social listening efforts?
• Reputation score  (AKA sentiment level). Are people happy or sad when 
talking about you? Is the tone negative or positive?
• Retention rate.  Are you retaining customers (and followers)? If not, why?
• Refund rate.  Are you able to resolve issues without having to issue 
refunds? 
• Product gaps identified.  What suggestions are people making for new 
product features?
• Content gaps identified.  What content should you develop to answer 
questions and resolve issues before  they arise?
EXTRA:  Read more about social listening and Feedback Loops here: http://
www.digitalmarketer.com/social-listening/
Chapter 04: Developing a Social
Media Strategy1182. Social Influencing
At this stage, your aim is to lead and direct your followers’ opinions, attitudes, 
and behaviors. And since you’ve been listening, it’s relatively easy. You already 
know the trending topics and conversations taking place, so adding your 
authority voice is the natural next step.
What are the signs that your influence is growing?
• You get more engagement – people retweeting or sharing your posts, and 
people responding to your posts.
• Your traffic numbers increase – people click on your links.
• You develop a greater mindshare – people share their questions, thoughts, 
and opinions with you, and they eagerly seek interaction with you.
• You become a recognized authority and a brand people watch.
Keep in mind, this stage of the success cycle is influenced by the social 
listening you did in Stage 1. But the reality is that you’ll continue listening at 
every stage. In fact, once the cycle is going, you’ll perform every stage every 
day. 
Goals for Social Influencing
During this phase of the social success cycle, you’re trying to:
• Increase engagement with your brand and your content. 
• Start conversations around the topics related to your business. 
• Boost traffic to your site.
• Build awareness of your products and offers. 
• Grow your retargeting list. 
Chapter 04: Developing a Social
Media Strategy119Retargeting is an advanced tactic that can significantly boost your bottom line. 
To learn more about retargeting (or remarketing), read The Remarketing Grid: 
The Science of Ad Retargeting Audience Segmentation .
Metrics to Watch
How do you know you’re building your social influence? These are the metrics 
that matter most: 
• Site engagement rates.  Are you getting more social shares and 
comments?
• Traffic by channel.  Traffic from your social media channels should increase 
over time.
• Offer awareness.  People see and respond to the offers you make in social 
media.
• Retargeting list growth.  Through retargeting, you’re able to get your 
offers in front of people who are most likely to buy from you—and they 
respond by downloading your lead magnets and subscribing.
Need help boosting traffic from social media? The key is to leverage your blog 
posts in social channels. This post gives you a 6-step process for socializing a 
blog post . 
3. Social Networking
It’s at this stage of the social cycle that you connect with other influencers and 
authorities and begin to move the needle.
Social networking is important for all businesses, whether you’r e just getting 
started, scaling, or expanding into new markets.
It may help to think of social networking as a live event—except your 
interactions are online rather than face-to-face. After all, networking is 
networking, no matter where (or how) it happens. And it can lead to deep and 
lasting relationships, both with your followers and potential partners.
Chapter 04: Developing a Social
Media Strategy120The Process of Social Networking
Each time you publish an article on your blog, produce a new piece of 
content, or have a new offer, you’ll create social media posts designed for the 
channels you’re posting to (think “native” content) that get the word out.
You’ll share valuable content from peers and, yes, even your competitors. 
If it relates to your brand’s primary topic and helps your followers, it’s worth 
sharing. You’ll also engage with people one-on-one, both asking and 
answering questions.
That’s it.
Now let’s look at this process in action.
Here’s one of our own articles, which we shared in Facebook and Twitter. 
Notice that each post is appropriate for the channel.

Chapter 04: Developing a Social
Media Strategy121We also post conversational posts, like this one from our Twitter stream:
Conversational Twitter posts
But we also want to share content that would help beginning digital 
marketers. After all, they may someday become our customers. So we share 
back-to-basics content and useful information from other brands.
Chapter 04: Developing a Social
Media Strategy122Take these, for example:
This post from ThinkwithGoogle aligns with our values.
Chapter 04: Developing a Social
Media Strategy123
Email marketing is one of the core competencies we teach, so this post from 
MailChimp is a good fit.
By adopting a similar approach, you won’t just attract happy followers, though 
you’ll have plenty of those. By sharing useful content from other brands, you’ll 
build good will and strong alliances with the brands you share. 
Chapter 04: Developing a Social
Media Strategy124For example, we’ve consistently shared content from Content Marketing 
Institute, Buffer, and MarketingProfs. Initially, that led to a robust network. But 
some of those relationships have turned into strong partnerships, as well.
Your Goals for Social Networking
During this stage of the social success cycle, your aim is to:
• Share content that fills gaps left from your own content. This content may 
relate topically or target people at different skill levels.
• Create good will with brands that are similar to yours.
• Over time, transform that good will into profitable partnerships.
Metrics to Watch
To measure the strength of your social network, watch these metric:
• Number of inbound links. A strong network will result in more backlinks to 
your content.
• Number and description of earned media mentions.  Consider the 
relevance and value of the mentions, who they come from, and the value 
of those mentions.
• Number and description of earned strategic partnerships.  Are you 
reaching out to partnership prospects, or are they reaching out to you? 
How relevant are those brands to your business, and what is the value of 
those relationships?
Getting more clicks from social media requires irresistible headlines. Steal from 
this headline swipe file .
Chapter 04: Developing a Social
Media Strategy1254. Social Selling
The fourth and final stage of the social success cycle is social selling. 
This is where social media marketing gets interesting. Finally, after listening 
to your prospects, building authority in your space, and establishing a strong 
network, you can start putting your offers in front of people—and converting 
them.
What does good social selling look like?
Good social selling integrates with your funnels.
The short answer is funnels. But you’ll use multiple channels for getting people 
into those funnels, from blogging to retargeting to pay-per-click advertising.
So, for instance, you’ll lead with blog content that’s perfectly targeted to 
your audience, and in that content, you’ll embed an opt-in offer. Then you’ll 
promote the content in social media (leveraging Stages 2 and 3 of this cycle). 
Your social promotion will direct traffic to your content, where they’ll see your 
offer. If they respond, you’ll immediately make an upsell offer—a low-priced 
product designed to convert your new lead quickly into a customer. We call 
that entry-level product a tripwire.
But what if a visitor doesn’t respond to your offer?
Chapter 04: Developing a Social
Media Strategy126You’ll retarget them with a relevant ad, so they receive multiple touches that 
could lead to a conversion after they leave your site. The ad takes them to a 
funnel, where they’re offered the same (or a related) lead magnet—and then 
an entry-level product.
Of course, you should also try to upsell and cross-sell to existing customers.
Upsell and cross-sell to existing customers.
For example, if they buy a patio cover, they’re probably in the market for patio 
furniture. Retarget them with the next logical offer.
The point is this:  Don’t simply create one offer. Create a buying path that 
boosts the lifetime value of every customer.
Goals for Social Selling 
• Your goals at this stage are to:
• Generate leads to grow your email list.
• Acquire new customers and upsell/cross-sell existing customers.
• Increase buyer frequency, turning one-time customers into raving fans.
Chapter 04: Developing a Social
Media Strategy127Metrics to Watch
To track your success at social selling, watch these metrics:
• Number of leads.  Over time, your email list show grow. 
• Offer conversion rate.  Are your offers converting? Maybe your offer isn’t 
relevant or isn’t close enough to your prospects’ bottom-line desire.
• Buyer recency / frequency.  You want customers to buy repeatedly and 
often.
We’ve covered the metrics you should watch for each stage of the social cycle, 
but maybe you’d like more information. For a deep dive into metrics and 
social ROI, read 7 Ways to Actually Track Social Media ROI .
Relevant Roles in Social Media Marketing
Once you understand the basics of social media marketing, you need to 
identify the people who will be responsible for managing your success. 
There’s no right answer. It will depend on your organization and goals. But in 
most cases, you’ll find your best solution in one of three departments.

Chapter 04: Developing a Social
Media Strategy128Marketing
Marketing and social media integrate so closely, it’s hard to tell where one 
ends and the other begins. And most marketers are already involved in social 
media since it gives them the 3 things they need to do their job well:
• Customer insights.
• Understanding of the trends and conversations influencing their prospects.
• A powerful channel for disrupting the status quo.
Because they’re already actively participating in social media, marketing 
professionals could be a good fit for managing/directing your social media 
efforts.
Sales
Like marketing, successful sales depends on being relevant and current. 
Salespeople often use social media to engage with prospects, identify talking 
points, and figure out what matters most to people evaluating their products.
That being the case, someone on your sales team may be a good fit for 
managing/directing your social media program.
Public Relations
Public relations is another good option for taking responsibility of your social 
media. PR is all about creating a positive brand perception, and it’s already 
customer centric, which makes it social by default.
Community Manager
One last source to consider is your community manager, if you have one.
Social media is about being present and truly engaging with your fans and 
followers. That’s pretty much the definition of a community manager.
Chapter 04: Developing a Social
Media Strategy129If you already have an active social community, your community manager 
could be a good fit for taking on your social media efforts. They already 
create, maintain, and encourage member-to-member relationships. As your 
social media manager/director, they’ll simply scale those efforts.
The Lingo You’ll Use in Your Social Cycle
Knowing the lingo will help you communicate what you’re doing with other 
professionals. Here are 5 terms you need to know.
“Value First” Offer
Social media marketing is really just another channel for your marketing, which 
means you’re creating an environment where you can make successful offers. 
Offers that are appropriate for social channels include:
• Valuable content.  Link to content that has embedded offers and CTAs.
• Lead magnets, or opt-in offers.  These are designed to get cold traffic 
into your funnels.
• Tripwires, or deep-discount offers.  Use these to upsell and cross-sell new 
and existing customers.
Feedback Loop
You need a system where complaints, praise, and other useful comments 
“heard” during social listening are routed to the correct person in your 
organization.
This makes it easy to apply the 3-step social customer service plan: 
1. Acknowledge the concerns. 
2. Forward the issue to the right person.
3. Take the issue off public channels and resolve it in a timely manner.
Chapter 04: Developing a Social
Media Strategy130Social Media Bouncing
Much of the success of social media marketing is the frequency of “touches.” 
If you’re on more than one social channel, and people see you on multiple 
channels, you create a j-curve of exposure.
That’s what we call social media bouncing: A social media follower on one 
channel is exposed to your brand on another channel.
Take Taco Bell, for example.
First, you see them on a billboard. 
Then you follow them on Twitter. 

Chapter 04: Developing a Social
Media Strategy131Then you click through to their site or a Buzzfeed post where you see them yet 
again.
Your goal is the same—to engage with your followers on all your channels, 
fully immersing them in your brand.
Social Media Topic Map
Two keys to successful marketing are relevance and focus . Your topic map 
helps you stay “on brand” with both. As a bonus, by narrowing the topics you 
post about, you actually increase engagement. 
Here’s how it works…
Take your brand, the products/services you offer, and your primary message. 
Then figure out the topics and subject matter that are “on brand” to discuss 
on social channels.
For example, for a health insurance company, the topic map would include the 
primary topic, insurance. But it could also include financial management and 
health.
Chapter 04: Developing a Social
Media Strategy132Read more about topic maps here. http://www.digitalmarketer.com/increase-
social-media-engagement/  
Long-tail Media Outreach
This is the process of earning mentions from lots of small media players 
(bloggers, podcasters, etc.) instead of a small number of large media players. 
You see, traffic may surge after a mention by a large-media player, but it will 
soon return to normal. Smaller media channels, on the other hand, have a 
more targeted audience that’s a better fit—and their audiences actually listen 
to them.
As a result, a few mentions from these smaller players can give you higher 
quality leads that actually convert. You may not get traffic surges, but your 
bottom line will get a boost.
The strategy? Figure out who the influencers are in your space, who’s listening 
to them, and whether they’re competitors or potential partners. Then build 
relationship with the small players who are a good fit for targeted outreach.
Your Social Media Success Metrics 
We’ve talked about specific metrics for tracking the 4 stages of your social 
cycle, but there are a few more metrics that can show you whether you’re 
nailing your social media strategy overall. Here are 3 you need to watch.
Applause Rate
Every social share and mention is a form of applause. Because let’s face it, no 
one shares something they don’t perceive as valuable.
Measure the sum total of all social shares (Facebook, Likes, Tweets, LinkedIn 
shares, etc.) and comments on a piece of content.
Traffic by Channel
It’s important to know where your traffic is coming from. So use a tool like 
BuzzSumo that can measure your social traffic by channel. 
Chapter 04: Developing a Social
Media Strategy133Lots of engagement indicates you’ve found a topic your audience resonates 
with. Low engagement tells you you’ve missed the mark.
Ideally, you want to know who likes your content and how often it’s being 
shared. From that, you can figure out what’s working and where you need to 
improve. 
Conversions from Social Media
Once you know the traffic that’s coming from social channels, the next step is 
to calculate your conversions from social media.
You want to know the percentage of visits from social media that take the 
action you’re driving on a web page. For that, the formula is:
[traffic from social media ] divided by [ total traffic ]
Ultimately, this is the number you want to impact. The higher your conversion 
rate, the more successful your social media marketing is.
Bottom Line
Like it or not, we live in a social world. Your customers are on the social 
web, sharing experiences and opinions related to you, your brand, and your 
industry.
Are you listening?
The approach we’ve shared in this chapter will help you create a strategic 
social media plan that helps you keep up with the conversations taking place 
online, as well as getting you in front of your customers—and helping you 
lead, engage with, and sell to them.
Chapter 04: Developing a Social
Media Strategy134But there’s another (more direct) way for you to have conversations with your 
prospects and customers: email. And it’s a vital piece of your digital marketing 
strategy. 
Email is hands-down the most effective way to move prospects through the 
Customer Journey. It’s also your ticket to loyal customers and repeat sales. So 
don’t miss it.
Chapter 04: Developing a Social
Media Strategy135Become a Social & Community Manager Specialist
Thanks to an ever-changing social landscape, consumers have altered the way 
they voice criticism and praise, the way they consume information, and, most 
importantly, the way they buy. 
Successful brands must learn to adapt to these changes, and put plans and 
processes in place to listen, influence, network and sell in this environment. 
In this mastery course, you’ll learn to assess business goals and employ sound 
social media marketing practices to meet those goals. 
You’ll also be trained on the most up-to-date social media marketing practices 
that work TODAY, and will continue to work TOMORROW.
Click Here to Learn More »

Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices137After reading the last chapter, we’re confident you understand that we live in a 
social world. 
Your own experience probably backs that up. Every day, you chat in real-time 
with people all over the world.
Does that spell the end of email marketing?
As social media has grown in importance, many so-called marketing experts 
have predicted the end of email. 
Don’t believe them! Email marketing is alive and well. 
And here’s why we say that with the utmost confidence:
• Traffic and Conversion Summit launched in 2009 with 258 attendees. Email 
marketing was a big part of the launch strategy.
• Using email marketing to promote the event, T&C grew to 4,500 attendees 
in just 8 years.
• In only one year, DigitalMarketer generated well over $20 million in 
revenue from email marketing alone.
Regardless of the rumors, email is nowhere near “dead”—and if you know 
how to use it, it will help you exponentially grow your business.
With that in mind, in this chapter, we’ll review the basics of email marketing, 
including the methods, the metrics, the lingo you need to know, and who on 
your team should own email marketing.
But first, let’s look at the role email plays in a growing business.CHAPTER
05
Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices138The Role of Email Marketing 
Email marketing can be used for branding, engagement, acquisition, 
retention, direct sales, reactivation, generating traffic, and getting referrals, 
making it one of the most versatile tools any business can use to grow their 
business. 
But it’s important to understand why we use email marketing. Interestingly, it’s 
not for profit or growth. 
The outcome of strategic email marketing is indeed profit and growth, but the 
purpose of email marketing is to move your customers from one stage of the 
“value journey” to the next. 
The goal of email is to assist and expedite a customer’s movement from 
one stage of the value journey to the next.
We talked about the “Customer Value Journey” in Chapter 1. But let’s review 
it again.
Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices139
This is your business. Think of it as a path your customers will travel as they get 
to know you. 
In the bottom left corner, they’re only just becoming aware of you, but by the 
time they reach the top right corner, not only do they know you, they promote 
you to everyone they know because you’ve transformed their life.
This journey, from awareness to conversion to promotion, is the customer 
journey.  As the customer travels this path, their lifetime value increases as 
well, adding profits and stability to your business. That’s why we also call this 
the value journey.
And it’s through email that you expedite the journey— if you understand the 
methods that work .
Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices140Methods of Well-Executed Email Marketing 
Email marketing is more than broadcasting an email every time you publish 
a new blog post. And it’s more than sending email alerts when you have a 
promotion or sale.
To master email marketing, you need to understand the types of emails you’ll 
use, their timing, and the different campaigns you’ll use to connect with your 
subscribers.
The Types of Emails You’ll Use in Email Marketing
There are three types of emails that you’ll rely on as an email marketer.
• Transactional – to provide customer service.
• Relational – to engage subscribers and nurture relationship with them.
• Promotional – for generating sales.
As you can see in the chart below, each type facilitates a different interaction 
with your subscribers. 
Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices141
You’ll use 3 different types of emails to engage with your subscribers.
Email Type #1: Transactional Emails
These are the emails that get sent out by your automated systems, confirming 
actions taken by your prospects and customers.
While most transactional emails are templates provided by the marketing 
systems we use, the average revenue per transactional email is 2x to 5x 
higher than standard bulk email .
Here are the 8 types of transactional emails you can use, along with some tips 
for raising their transactional value:
1. Order Confirmations
Order confirmation emails have a higher open rate than any other type of 
email. That makes sense if you think about it: the recipient has just given you 
money and wants to verify the details of their purchase. 
Most brands don’t do anything to optimize this email for growth. But look at 
what Amazon does.
Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices142
Yes, emails can (and should) be optimized for growth.
This email confirms the purchase, sets expectations, and finishes the 
transaction. The customer is excited about their purchase—which means it’s a 
great time to add an additional offer or ask for a referral. 
2. Purchase Receipts 
Receipt emails, like confirmation emails, have a high open rate, but they’re 
rarely leveraged for growth. 
Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices143See what I mean:
Confirmation emails have a high open rate.
In this example, the template provides space for a “contact us” message. Why 
not make an offer as well?
3. Shipping Notices
Another email that excites your customers is your shipping alert email, telling 
them their purchase has been shipped and when it will arrive. 
Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices144
Shipping alerts get customers excited about their purchase.
As you can see, there’s not usually anything in this email that could expedite 
the customer journey. 
But you’ve just reminded your customer of their purchase, renewing their 
excitement about getting it in the mail. What could you add to leverage that 
excitement? Could you ask them to tell their friends? What about a social 
share? 
4. Account Creation 
This email goes out when you create an account for new purchases, providing 
customers their login information. 
Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices145
Think about how you can leverage transactional emails.
As with most transactional emails, this email is rarely leveraged. But getting 
access to a closed group is a bit like getting a present. Your customers are 
feeling excited and happy. Why not ask them to do something—say, to share 
their excitement with their friends in social media?
5. Return Confirmation
If you sell physical products and someone requests a return merchandise 
authorization (RMA), this is a fantastic time to make them an of fer or give them 
a coupon. While they aren’t happy about the product they’re returning, they 
can get excited about your excellent customer service. 
Your goal here is to re-engage customers, perhaps by offering a different 
product that would fit their needs better or by providing a coupon code. 
For example, you might double the refund amount on another purchase. Or 
for a SaaS product, you could offer to provide whatever help is needed while 
lowering the price if they stay. Here’s an example of that approach:
Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices146
Creatively addressing customer concerns can help you re-engage them.
6. Support Tickets
As with Return Confirmation emails, support ticket follow-up emails give you 
an opportunity to add tons of value. If someone received great support, you 
can easily ask them to share their experience or extend their happiness by 
giving them a coupon. 
7. Password Reminders
Most password reminder emails contain little more than a link:
Typical password reminder email
Why not make an offer or announce an upcoming event?
Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices1478. Unsubscribe Confirmations
This email is a standard automated email. But what if you could figure out an 
offer that would be appropriate for these emails? How much growth would 
that add to your business? How much more movement would you get through 
that customer journey? 
This is the thinking you need to develop to win at email marketing.
You see, with email, you don’t have to make big changes to see big 
movement. Small tweaks can have very big effects. 
Think about the emails you already send. As you’ve seen, a lot of them are 
system-generated, which means they contain nothing more than generic 
messages. 
• What could you do with these emails to move people through your 
customer journey? 
• What could you do to transform subscribers into referral partners, 
ambassadors, or promoters of your brand?
Email Type #2: Relational Emails
Companies that use email to nurture leads generate 50% more sales-ready 
leads at 33% lower cost . 
Here are 8 types of relational emails you can use to get these results for your 
own business—whether it’s digital or brick-and-mortar. 
1. New Subscriber Welcome
This email should be sent immediately to every new contact. It introduces 
them to your brand and tells them what to expect, including the benefits of 
being on your list and the value you intend to provide. 
Here’s an example that not only sets expectations but also adds value.
Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices148
Welcome emails should set expectations and add value.
2. Gated Content Delivery
Gated content is valuable information that isn’t freely available online. To 
access the information, you must “pay” with either your email address or a 
social share. Typically, lead magnets and opt-in offers are free in exchange for 
the visitor’s email address.
This automated email delivers the content that was requested, successfully 
concluding that transaction. But as with transactional emails, there’s lots of 
room to creatively increase their value.
Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices149Notice that Bob Bly’s email (above) tells people how to access their gated 
content while selling the value of being a subscriber. This gets people excited 
about opening his emails and helps him retain subscribers long-term.
3. Newsletters/Blog Articles
Whenever you create content, you should use email to distribute it to your 
subscribers. These emails can be short and simple, introducing your topic and 
providing a link to access it.
Use email to distribute new blog articles to your subscribers.
Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices1504. Webinar/Event Confirmation 
This type of email is both relational  and transactional . You’ve asked someone 
to block off some time to put you into their schedule. They’ve made a 
commitment to you. You need to confirm that commitment. 
That’s the transactional side of things. You need to send them a confirmation 
email that spells out the date and time of your webinar, plus any other 
pertinent information.
But you also want these emails to be relational—because people prioritize 
time they’ve set aside for their friends.
Here’s a good example from one of our webinars. Notice that we review the 
information that will be shared in the event, so attendees’ interest will stay 
high.
Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices151
A relational webinar confirmation email
As with gated content, webinar or event confirmations give you the chance to 
prove that you can be trusted to deliver what you promise. If you develop a 
reputation for following through on free transactions, it’s easy to believe you’ll 
be trustworthy in paid transactions as well.
The next 4 types of relational email are used less often, but they can still help 
you engage with subscribers and move them through the customer journey. 
They are:
Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices1525. Survey/Review
Surveys can help you learn more about your customers’ interests. It can also 
help you segment them so your offers will be precisely targeted to their 
needs.
6. Social Update
Update your followers on changes in your company or your product. This can 
help you build excitement as well as preparing them for what’s coming up.
7. Contest Announcement
Contests build excitement and attract new subscribers. Your current email 
subscribers should be the first to hear the news, though. After all, they’r e 
probably your most avid fans.
8. Referral Request
After any positive interaction with your subscribers, it makes sense to ask for 
a referral. Think new purchase, resolution of a problem, or just a friendly email 
with a kind word.
Relational emails, regardless of why they’re being sent, should be “human” 
rather than scripted. And they should always provide value. Remember to 
spell out the next steps and encourage people to take those steps right away .
Email Type #3: Promotional Emails
According to the Direct Marketing Association,  66% of consumers have 
made a purchase online as a direct result of an email marketing message.  
Obviously, promotional emails are a powerful growth tool.
So let’s talk about the 8 types of promotional emails you should be sending, 
including examples from the DigitalMarketer archives.
1. Promotional Content
Promotional content is content that’s perceived as valuable to your audience 
while it generates sales for you. 
Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices153This type of content shouldn’t be overused, but balanced with relational 
content, it’s a good way to engage your subscribers. 
You can see this dual purpose in action in the example below. 
Promotional content is valuable while generating sales.
Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices154The value to the recipient is a free template, but its goal is to promote the 
Summit.
2. New Gated Content
Gated content aims to attract new subscribers, but existing subscribers ar e 
likely to want it as well. Why not send it to your email list to get them r e-
engaged and move them along the customer journey?
This example has the subject line, “[CHECKLIST] Get up to 20% better email 
deliverability,” which is sure to get noticed. Make sure your subject line is just 
as compelling.
Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices155New gated content, sent to your subscribers, can get them re-engaged.

Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices1563. A Sale Announcement
Sale announcements get more engagement than any other type of email. 
Clearly, if you want to make a bunch of sales, have a sale. 
But you need to use a subject line that’s guaranteed to get noticed. 
Like this one: [Flash Sale] 7 PROVEN Blog Post Templates (85% off)
Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices157Sales announcements get a lot of engagement, provided the subject            
line is good.

Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices1584. New Product Release
Your goal as an email marketer is to take new subscribers all the way through 
the value journey, transforming them into promoters. 
Why?
Because promoters are hyper-responsive and typically want everything you 
produce. That being the case, you should always be producing new products 
to support these “hyper-buyers.”
Then, make sure they know about it by creating a series of announcement/
promotion emails like this one, announcing DigitalMarketer’s all-new Content 
& Commerce event in 2016.
Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices159
Always produce new content to support hyper-buyers.
In the same way, use these last 4 types of promotional emails to let your 
subscribers and hyper-buyers know what you’re doing to solve their problems.
5. Webinar Announcements
6. Event Announcements
Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices1607. Trial Offers
8. Upgrade Offers
Now let’s talk about the difference between broadcast and triggered emails.
When to Send Each Type of Email (And to Whom)
Email service providers allow you to send emails in one of two ways: 
• Broadcast  emails are sent manually to your entire list or a segment of your 
list. They work well for promotions and content emails. 
• Autoresponders  are set up in advance to be delivered when someone 
performs a triggering action. Most of your email marketing (barring 
promotions and content emails) should be automated.
Keep in mind, though:  Just because you CAN trigger a message, doesn’t 
mean you SHOULD!
By segmenting and automating your emails, you’re able to send messages 
that are highly relevant to your subscribers’ interests and priorities. That’s a win 
for you and your subscribers.
But just as you can under-automate, you can also over-automate, creating 
long, complex campaigns that keep your subscribers stuck in a particular 
phase of their value journey.
The goal, remember is to expedite people’s customer journey. And the more 
emails you create for each stage of their journey, the greater the odds that 
you’ll entrench them in that stage, slowing their overall journey.
Triggering That Works
Here are the 8 triggers that are most common in email automation.
1. New Subscriber 
Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices161When someone subscribes, you want to automate their welcome and 
indoctrination to create a great first impression. 
2. Lead Magnet Request
Most new subscribers will join your list when they opt in to get a lead magnet. 
Automating delivery ensures they get it within minutes of their request. 
Be aware, a new subscriber will likely trigger two automations: subscriber 
welcome and lead magnet delivery—both. That’s okay. 
3. Event Registration 
If someone registers for an event, set up a confirmation email that gives them 
the details they’ll need, including date, time, and any access information. 
4. Purchase 
Similarly, if someone makes a purchase, they want confirmation that their order 
went through. A purchase receipt does just that.
Be aware, though, if they’re not currently a subscriber, their purchase may 
trigger a subscriber welcome automation as well. That’s okay. 
5. Clicking a Link in a Segmentation Campaign
Segmenting allows you to customize your emails to each subscriber’s interests. 
Their behavior—clicking a link in an email, for example—can be used to 
trigger an engagement campaign. This way, people who don’t care about the 
topic won’t see the campaign. But everyone who cares, not only sees your 
content, they see your promotion as well.
6. Excitement About Your Brand
Referral requests can be automated to follow up purchases and other 
behaviors that indicate they’re engaged and excited about your brand. 
7. Cart Abandonment 
Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices162One of the easiest ways to increase customer value is to move people off the 
fence just prior to a purchase. When someone adds products to their cart but 
doesn’t complete the transaction, that should trigger a reminder email.
8. Not Engaging with Your Emails
Re-engagement is how you reactivate subscribers who have stopped 
engaging with your emails. 
Each of these triggers should set off an automated email campaign designed 
to follow up the triggering behavior and encourage people to take the next 
step in their customer journey.
Understanding Email Timing
You want your subscribers to be excited about getting your emails, and you 
want to train them open and engage with them.
There are two approaches you’ll need to take to make that happen: 
segmentation and timing emails to coincide with the customer jour ney.
Segmentation allows you to send emails to the people who will be most likely 
to respond favorably. No one sees a promotion they aren’t interested in, and 
people feel like their emails are tailor-made for them.
Timing is about understanding where your subscribers are in their customer 
journey and only sending them emails that are appropriate for that phase.
The 5 Phases of Email Marketing

Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices163When you understand the phases of the customer journey, it’s easier to send 
the right message at the right time. So let’s talk about the 5 phases of email 
marketing and the stages of the customer journey they align with.
1. The Indoctrination Campaign
Definition:  A triggered campaign  sent immediately after someone 
subscribes to introduce them to your brand and set expectations.
Stage of customer journey:  Subscribe
Use this campaign to:
• Welcome new subscribers.
• Tell them what they can expect.
• Tell them what they need to do next to get the biggest benefit from you 
and your brand.
This campaign is sent to new subscribers to establish your authority, help them 
understand the value you’re going to provide, and get them excited about 
you and your brand. 
If you do a good job of indoctrinating them, they’ll begin to recognize your 
name in their inbox, and they’ll engage with the content you send them. 
Storyboard It 
Step 1 : Start by welcoming new subscribers and introducing them to your 
brand.
Step 2:  Re-state in 3-4 bullet points the benefits they’ll get as a subscriber . 
(This is important. If you can’t articulate the benefits of subscribing, how do 
you expect them to understand the benefits of buying from you?)
Step 3:  Tell them what to expect, using this framework: here’s what we’re 
going to do; here’s what you need to do after we’ve done it.
Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices164For example: 
Two to three times a week we’re going to send you brand new content and 
strategies on digital marketing. [Here’s what we do.]
When you get that email, read it and save it—because when you’re looking 
for a strategy that works, you’re going to want to be able to access this 
information.  [Here’s what you need to do after we’ve done it.]
Step 4:  Encourage whitelisting by saying something along these lines:
The information we provide—even the free information—is very important, 
and if you’re not getting it, you’re losing out. So here’s what I want you to 
do:
• Whitelist this email address. [Include a link to instructions.]
• Create a folder where you can save all our messages.
• Don’t auto archive any of them. (Read them and use them to grow your 
business!) 
Step 5: Put your best foot forward. Send them a “best of” campaign, listing 
the content your existing subscribers have engaged with the most. For 
example:
• Your highest shared content, whether it’s video or a blog post
• Your highest commented Facebook post or Facebook Live
• A piece of content that has gotten rave reviews 
Think of your indoctrination emails as a first date with your new subscriber . 
Show up in your best clothes, tell your best stories, and focus on building 
relationship with your new subscribers.
Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices1652. The Engagement Campaign
Definition:  An interest-based, triggered campaign  sent after your 
subscriber takes a specific action that makes a relevant offer (and sale) to your 
subscriber.
Stage of customer journey:  Convert & Excite
Use this campaign to: 
• Turn subscribers into buyers by prescribing the next logical step based on 
what you know they’re currently interested in.
This campaign targets subscribers who have just engaged with your brand. For 
instance, maybe they visited a page or downloaded a lead magnet, but they 
didn’t take the next action you presented.
The goal of this campaign is to engage with the subscriber, reference the 
positive action they’ve taken with you, and tell them the next logical action 
that will end in a purchase.
Storyboard It 
Step 1:  Acknowledge the action they just took.
Step 2:  Try to overcome the objections you know they’re experiencing. Don’t 
just talk about the tactical, lever-pulling features. Address the thoughts and 
feelings that keep them from taking action.
Step 3: Prescribe the next logical step. Clearly spell it out. 
Step 4: Ask them to buy. 
Email marketing is about building relationships with your followers, sure. 
But you need to set expectations from the beginning of that relationship. 
Since, ultimately, you want your followers to become customers, you need to 
confidently ask for the buy.
Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices1663. The Ascension Campaign
Definition: An interest-based, triggered campaign  that makes a relevant 
offer (and sale) to your subscriber immediately following their triggering 
behavior.
Stage of customer journey:  Excite & Ascend
Use this campaign to:
• Expedite and accelerate the value journey. 
• Turn new buyers into multi-buyers by prescribing the next logical step (or 
nurturing them until it’s appropriate to take that step).
Like the engagement campaign, this campaign is triggered by a subscriber’s 
action—generally a purchase—and presents the next logical step with your 
brand.
In many cases, it fills the gaps in your funnel, improving your results. 
You see, each additional offer is a stopping point where customers might 
decline and exit your funnel. This sequence is designed to follow up that of fer, 
provide extra incentives to buy, and overcome any objections for not buying.
Storyboard It 
Step 1: Start by referencing the action they just took. (Don’t address the 
action they didn’t take: “We noticed that you didn’t  buy our core product, 
so I’m sending you this email.”) Congratulate them. Acknowledge their 
excitement. Build on that positive energy.
Step 2:  Address and overcome the objections that might be keeping them 
from taking the next step. 
Step 3: Clearly spell out the next logical step, so they know what they need to 
do.
Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices167Your goal is to turn one-time buyers into multi-buyers. To do that, you must 
articulate the value you’re providing, remind them of the benefits they’ll 
receive, and increase their interest and excitement. 
But before you immediately start pushing a sale, ask yourself two important 
questions:
QUESTION #1: What is the next step I want them to take?
QUESTION #2: Do I have any reason to believe they are ready to take that 
next step?
These questions are important because (believe it or not) it can hurt to ask!  
What do I mean by that? 
Your offer must be appropriate for the stage of the relationship. If you move 
too fast or push too hard, you’ll make your subscribers uncomfortable, and 
they’ll leave. 
If they’re not ready to take the next step in your value ladder, don’t ask. 
Nurture that subscriber until the time is right, and then make your offer.
4. Segmentation Campaign
Definition: A manual promotional campaign sent to your entire database 
with the goal of segmenting your subscribers by interest.
Stage of customer journey:  All
Use this campaign to:
• Pique the interest of subscribers who are “stuck” in their value journey.
• Get them to segment themselves based on what they’re interested in now.
This is one of the only email campaigns that isn’t automated and triggered 
by a subscriber’s behavior. Instead, you broadcast this promotion to your 
entire database (or a large segment of it) with the goal of segmenting your 
subscribers by interest. 
Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices168You want your subscribers to raise their hands and say, “Yes, I’m interested 
in this topic.” And when they’ve done that, you should have an engagement 
campaign set up to continue speaking to them about it. 
The goal is this: to send more emails to the people who engage with your 
campaign and fewer emails to the people who don’t. 
This approach may seem counterintuitive, but it works because it 
demonstrates that you’re listening. And from our experience: 
• If you listen to what your subscribers are saying, they’ll give you more 
money. 
• If you listen to what they want, they’ll engage with your brand more. 
Ideas for Segmentation Campaigns 
Idea 1: Use content to segment your list: blog posts, video, or gated content. 
Then, when someone engages with that content—indicating interest in the 
topic—send them an engagement campaign with promotional content based 
on that topic.
Idea 2: Use special offers: coupons, flash sales, or special promotions. High-
value, time-sensitive offers give people a good reason to take immediate 
action, which can help you expedite their value journey. 
Idea 3: Use events: webinars, demos, workshops, or even one-on-one phone 
calls. Time is money, as the saying goes. After investing the time to attend an 
event, people are more inclined to invest their dollars as well. 
5. The Re-Engagement Campaign
Definition: A triggered campaign designed to re-engage any subscriber who 
hasn’t opened or clicked an email in the last 30 to 60 days.
Stage of customer journey:  Any
Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices169Use this campaign to:
• Call out inactive subscribers and get them to start engaging with your 
emails again.
• Get them re-excited about you and your brand.
The reality is that not everyone will engage with your emails. Their interests 
or circumstances will change. And no matter where they are on the customer 
journey, they can become inactive. 
What then?
You send a re-engagement campaign designed to re-capture their interest and 
get them opening and clicking your emails once again. 
Storyboard It  
Step1: Identify your inactive subscribers—anyone who hasn’t clicked on an 
email in the previous 30 to 60 days.
Step 2: Give them a reason to re-engage with your emails. For example, you 
could take the direct approach, and ask if everything’s okay: 
I noticed you haven’t been opening or clicking my emails, and I just wanted 
to send an email and ask, “Is everything O.K.?”
Step 3: Remind them of the benefits of being a subscriber.
Step 4: Tell them what they’ve missed. As you would in an indoctrination 
campaign, send them some of your best content. 
If this campaign works, you’ll have re-engaged your inactive subscribers and, 
hopefully, put them back on their value journey.
But what if it doesn’t work?
Simple. Stop emailing them. 
Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices170Inactive subscribers raise your costs and hurt your deliverability. They’re also 
the ones most likely to complain when they see your emails in their inbox. So 
there’s no need to feel guilty. Clean your list on a regular basis.
Using These 5 Campaign Types to Expedite the Customer 
Journey
The 5 types of email campaigns we’ve just reviewed will help you engage 
your subscribers at every stage of their value journey. But it’s important to 
remember that your goal isn’t merely to engage people. 
Email marketing is about quickly move your subscribers from one stage of the 
value journey to the next.
Typically, that journey begins when someone becomes aware of your brand 
and decides to subscribe. Once that happens, your job is to:
• Turn your new subscriber into a customer.
• Get them excited about the brand. 
• Ascend them by getting them to buying more, higher-value products.
• Turn them into an advocate. 
• Turn them into a promoter. 
The 5 campaigns we’ve reviewed will help you achieve each of these goals—
and quickly turn new subscribers into active promoters. 
Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices171The Metrics: How Email Marketing Is Measured
Sending the right emails to the right people at the right time is only one 
aspect of email marketing. To optimize your efforts, you also need to measure 
your results. 
Here are the top performance metrics that will help you manage your email 
marketing.
List Growth
For this metric, you want to watch the number of new subscribes as compared 
to the number of unsubscribes. As you might expect, you want the ratio to be 
positive.
Delivery Rate 
The percent of messages delivered to the recipient’s inbox relative to the 
number of emails sent. Aim for a delivery rate of 95+ percent. 
Open Rate
The percent of messages opened by the recipient relative to the number of 
emails sent.
Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices172Click-Through Rate (CTR)
The percent of email messages clicked relative to the number of emails sent 
or, in some cases, relative to the number of emails opened.
Unsubscribe Rate
The percent of emails that lead to an unsubscribe relative to the number of 
emails sent.
Complaint Rate
The percent of emails marked as Spam relative to the number of emails sent.
TIP: Your email delivery rate will go up if your open rate and click-through 
rates go up and unsubscribe rate goes down. 
This is why we encourage segmented email campaigns that target people 
at their specific stage in the value journey. Our approach to email marketing 
is strategically designed to boost opens and click-through while minimizing 
unsubscribes.
The Lingo Email Marketers Use
What are the terms you need to know as an email marketer?
Customer Journey
Also known as the value journey. The development of a relationship with a 
prospect that takes them on a path from awareness of your business, products, 
and brand to rabid fan.
Broadcast Email
An email sent out to all email subscribers or a segment of your email 
subscriber list.
Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices173Triggered Email
An email sent automatically when a customer or prospect performs a specific 
action. For example, a relevant offer might be sent to someone who fills out a 
lead form.
Promotional Calendar
The 30-day and 90-day calendars containing the planned email campaigns 
that will intentionally move a prospect through the customer journey,
Email Storyboarding
The process of planning the structure, timing, and content of an email 
campaign.
Relevant Roles
Who in your organization should be trained in email marketing?
Three different departments should be proficient at and understand the role of 
email marketing.
Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices174Marketing 
Every marketing professional should understand how email marketing can be 
leveraged to move prospects through the customer journey—especially your 
monetization team.
Sales 
One of the most effective ways to create sales-ready conversations is to 
engage prospects through email. 
Editorial
Your editorial team will use email to distribute the content they create and add 
value to subscribers on an on-going basis.
Bottom Line
Email marketing consistently generates the highest ROI of any marketing 
activity, but sadly most businesses are doing it wrong (or ignoring it 
completely). 
Email is most effective when you coordinate it with your content and 
advertising campaigns—to indoctrinate your new subscribers, nurture those 
relationships, and move them quickly through the Customer Journey.
It may take you a while to master the tactics we discussed in this chapter, 
but the effort is well worth it. Email marketing will drive growth as no other 
strategy can. 
The next step in mastering digital marketing is search marketing, and we’ll 
cover that in the next chapter.
Chapter 05: Following Email
Marketing Best Practices175Become an Email Marketing Specialist
In this chapter, we’ve covered the basics, but you may still have questions. If 
so, let us know in the comments. 
Or, for more in-depth answers, consider becoming a certified email marketer.
In our Email Mastery course, you’ll learn the three types of email campaigns, 
as well as HOW and WHEN to use them. You’ll also learn how to architect the 
perfect promotional calendar and how to use automated email marketing to 
literally “sell while you sleep.” 
By the time you finish, you’ll be able to effectively monetize any email list, 
while simultaneously increasing engagement with your subscribers.
Click Here to Learn More »

Chapter 06: Designing Your Search
Marketing Strategy177Algorithm updates. Semantic markup. Search intent.
One thing’s for sure: search marketing ain’t what it used to be! 
Luckily, all these changes are good news for digital marketers like us. Because 
we’re not trying to game the system… 
And when you’re an honest marketer trying to deliver real value, you’re 
building a solid foundation for search marketing success.
That being the case, search marketing can help you boost your website’s traffic 
and visitors’ trust while supporting your other digital marketing disciplines too.
In this chapter, you’ll get an overview of the methods that are working now, 
including the lingo you’ll use to talk about it, the metrics that will measure 
your success, and the business roles that should own your search marketing 
strategy.
Before we dig into the details, though, let’s cover a few foundational 
principles.
The Big Picture
First, SEO is a broad field divided into 2 big camps.
1. The structural, or technical, side.  People in this camp focus on the 
technical details of your website rather than the quality of your content. 
2. The content side of things.  People in this camp know how to create well-
optimized content, build links, and boost social shares. 
Which camp is best?CHAPTER
06
Chapter 06: Designing Your Search
Marketing Strategy178There’s no contest. To succeed at search marketing, you need both. When you 
need to create link assets or get more backlinks, you need an SEO content 
specialist. But if Google doesn’t seem to see those assets, and you’re not 
ranking, you’ve likely got structural issues. You need an SEO technician.
Another thing to keep in mind is that SEO isn’t a once-and-done task. 
Hundreds and thousands of websites are constantly battling for the #1 spot in 
search engines for their target keywords—and securing that spot is kind of like 
playing the kid’s game, “king of the mountain.” 
SEO is a bit like the kid’s game, King of the Mountain.
You may knock off the guy who’s sitting there now, but someone is coming 
behind you, trying to knock you off as soon as you get there.
Which means your content needs to be finessed, updated, and promoted to 
rise in the search engine result pages (SERPs) and secure your top-ranking 
spot. Meanwhile, everything needs to be working right from a technical 
perspective.
Chapter 06: Designing Your Search
Marketing Strategy179Finally, search constantly changes. Google’s algorithm isn’t static. It’s based on 
artificial intelligence, and it’s learning more every day.
As a result, the rules change too. The tactics you use today won’t be the ones 
you use next month or next year. And that’s okay.
Expect to continue learning and adjusting the tactics you use. Don’t resist; just 
accept it as part of the process—because the only way to win at this game is 
by following the rules.
The Methods of Well-Executed Search
Search has evolved more than any other marketing discipline. Today, you must 
know the rules of search. Otherwise, you can hurt rather than help your brand. 
So let’s start by reviewing the methods that are working well today.
Search Marketing Today
Today, Search Is Mobile 
People are conducting searches from their mobile devices. That means your 
pages must be easily accessible from phones and tablets as well as computers.
It’s important to adopt a “mobile first” mindset.
Today, Search Is Structural and Technical
As mentioned above, if your site isn’t set up right, Google won’t even see you. 
But once your structural issues are resolved, you’ll focus mostly on content and 
basic on-page optimization. 
The key to SEO is simply to build a better page than anyone else on the web.
For each search query, Google wants to put the absolute best page at the 
top of the SERPs. So your page needs to be the most relevant and the closest 
match for searchers’ intent. 
How do you do that?
Chapter 06: Designing Your Search
Marketing Strategy180You research what’s already ranking for your target keyword and build 
something 10x better than those pages.
That’s it. 
There’s no hack and no easy button. Just a lot of hard work.
But on a positive note, if your content is 10x better than anything else on the 
web, your pages will rank.
Today, Search Is White Hat
Gone are the days of keyword stuffing. You must do what Google wants—and 
what they want is to provide a superior experience for their users. 
Old-style gray-hat and black-hat SEO tactics were borderline illegal, and 
they’re definitely unethical. So that’s NOT the approach we’re going to take.
The tactics we cover will give you a sustainable business that’s reputable and 
trustworthy. And honestly, it’s the only way to grow your business long-term. 
Today, Search Is Everywhere It Matters
What comes to mind when the topic of search marketing comes up?
Google, right?
They’re the premiere search engine, but be aware, they aren’t the only search 
engine in town.
Chapter 06: Designing Your Search
Marketing Strategy181
Google is just one of many search engines you can optimize for.
Today, every channel that uses search has an algorithm that you can learn and 
leverage for success.
That means you aren’t limited to optimizing for Google. It may be more 
lucrative for your business to focus on Google Maps or iTunes.
Let me explain…
Google’s search bots are incredibly smart, which makes it hard to rise to 
the top of their SERPs. But most other search bots—think Amazon, Yelp, or 
Pinterest—are less complex and easier to understand. Not only that, there are 
likely fewer people competing for their top spots, so it’s an easier game to 
win. 
We tend to equate search marketing with Google. But there’s a lot more 
to it than that. Search marketing is about producing the right content and 
publishing it on the right channels to attract the right customers, then doing 
what it takes to make your content rise to the top—whether that’s for Google 
or any other channel.
Chapter 06: Designing Your Search
Marketing Strategy182Approaching it this way, you’re taking the search game to a smaller playing 
field. While there may be fewer people searching those other channels, you’ll 
create content that’s optimized specifically for them.
Today, Search Is About More Than Traffic
When it comes to SEO, we talk about winning, ranking, and beating out 
the competition. You’d think that ranking at the top of Google (or whatever 
channel you’re using) is your top goal for search marketing.
But it’s not.
You can’t pay your bills with rank. And you can’t take traffic to the bank. In 
reality, those metrics are fluff. The real question is this: Are you making money 
from search?
The reason we do search marketing is to get more leads and sales, right? So in 
the next section, we’ll talk about a simple 6-part model for doing just that. 
Wondering how your site is doing in search?  Perform a DIY SEO Audit: 
High-Impact SEO in 5 Minutes or Less  and find out.
The 6-Part Model for Winning at SEO 
There are 3 stages of search marketing, each with 2 priorities. Let’s take a look 
at what they are, and then we’ll look at the entire 6-part system in action.
Intent & Context

Chapter 06: Designing Your Search
Marketing Strategy183SEO starts with user intent. 
What do we mean by that?
Essentially, everyone who types a query into Google’s search bar is looking for 
something. Regardless of the keywords they use, they have a specific intent. 
But that intent exists within the context of what they’re doing and what they 
want or need. Both the intent and the context are critically important for you 
to understand.
For example, maybe they’re:
Intent Context (why they have this intent)
Hungry They’re on the road and want to know the restaurants 
that are near them.
Lost They need directions to the store they’re looking for.
Worried Some weird symptoms have shown up and they want to 
know what could be causing them.
Stuck They’re installing tile in their kitchen and need 
instructions on cutting tiles.
Making plans They have an anniversary or other celebration coming up 
and are exploring their options.
If you’re targeting a keyword, you must understand the user intent and the 
context that’s behind the search. 
Ask yourself: What is the prospect searching for? Why do they likely want this 
information?
For example, if they’re typing in “historic bed and breakfast,” here’s what may 
be going on:
Chapter 06: Designing Your Search
Marketing Strategy184
Intent  = find a B&B
Context  = anniversary is coming up 
The context is vital information, and you need to ferret it out, because it will 
help you know what information to provide in your content.
Fortunately, the best research tool on the planet is easily accessible. It’s your 
own brain. Think about your customers. What searches are they performing 
when looking for or using your product? Why are they searching for that 
information?
Identify the keywords they’re likely using, then try to understand the intent and 
context around those searches. The idea is to anticipate their needs.
To help, do a quick Google search. Begin typing the keyword into Google 
and look at the autosuggestions Google provides (see the image above for 
an example). These suggestions are the most common searches related to the 
words you’re typing in, and from them, you can guess what people are looking 
for.
Chapter 06: Designing Your Search
Marketing Strategy185Asset & Channel
 
Once you know the information people are looking for and why they likely 
want that information, you need to build a unique asset for each of those 
needs.
This stage of the process is all about content creation. Before you start, ask 
yourself these questions:
• What keyword/intent am I targeting?
• What asset will satisfy that search?
• Where should the asset live?
Let’s say the query is, “start a vegetable garden.” The asset could be a blog 
post. Since people search for blog posts in Google, that’s the channel you’ll 
optimize for.
Chapter 06: Designing Your Search
Marketing Strategy186
Asset  = blog post
Channel  = Google search
But Google isn’t the only option. What if they’re looking for images to inspire 
them?
Asset  = Pinterest pin
Channel  = Pinterest
Chapter 06: Designing Your Search
Marketing Strategy187Or maybe they want to create the best garden in their community and want 
in-depth information:
Asset  = Book
Channel  = Amazon Kindle
This same approach works for brick-and-mortar businesses. Let’s go back to 
the B&B example we used earlier. What if people are looking for a B&B in St. 
Louis for their anniversary? 
Chapter 06: Designing Your Search
Marketing Strategy188
Asset  = the B&B’s business listing
Channel  = Google maps
Maybe they’re looking for reviews and suggestions:
 
Chapter 06: Designing Your Search
Marketing Strategy189Asset  = trip advisor listing 
Channel  = Trip Advisor
Or maybe they want to see it in HD video.
Asset  = video
Channel  = YouTube
Your goal is to choose an asset that will best answer the intent/context you’ve 
identified, then choose the channel the asset will live on.
Once you’ve done that, you’re ready for the last stage of the optimization 
process.
Chapter 06: Designing Your Search
Marketing Strategy190Optimization & Ascension
At this point, you’ve created the assets to address specific search queries, and 
you’re ready to upload them to their appropriate channels. 
Now it’s time to optimize it for each channel’s search algorithm and develop 
your customer ascension plan. For this, you’ll need to answer these questions: 
How will the prospect find this asset?
What is the next step in the customer journey?
Traffic isn’t your end goal, remember. Your ultimate goal is to create leads 
and sales. So you always need to tell visitors what their next step is, and those 
directions need to be built into the asset. 
Let’s look at some examples.
We’ll start with our vegetable garden search. Notice in this image that the 
asset is a blog post and its title tag is optimized for Google.
Chapter 06: Designing Your Search
Marketing Strategy191
The asset is a blog post, and the title is optimized for Google.
Want to learn more on-page optimization for blog posts?  Read How to Do 
On-Page SEO in WordPress .
If we click through to that blog post, we can clearly see the ascension path. 
Chapter 06: Designing Your Search
Marketing Strategy192
Visitors can easily identify their next step.
Notice the button embedded within the content and the product offers in 
the sidebar. Clearly, this site has developed an ascension path that looks 
something like this:
Google search > blog post > shop > purchase
Chapter 06: Designing Your Search
Marketing Strategy193They aren’t merely optimizing for search traffic. They’re optimizing for sales.
That’s what you want to do as well: pull traffic in and convert it. And here’s how 
you can get started now.
Go onto Google Analytics and find the pages on your site that get the most 
traffic.
Think about the logical next step for the traffic on those pages.
Put a call to action (CTA) somewhere on the page leading visitors to that next 
step. 
This is what search marketing is all about. It’s organic, so it’s free money. And 
all you need to do is put an ascension path on your high-traffic pages.
It’s the same on YouTube. In this example, the video title is optimized for the 
keyword, “save money on groceries.”
Chapter 06: Designing Your Search
Marketing Strategy194
Keyword being optimized for: save money on groceries
You can see the ascension path is both in the video and under  it. Within the 
video are links to a fat-burning workout product. Below the video is a link to 
her new book.
Chapter 06: Designing Your Search
Marketing Strategy195
Ascension path tells viewers what to do next.
Most SEO training focuses solely on traffic. The goal is primarily to rank at the 
top of Google.
But as you can see, people are searching for information in multiple channels, 
so there’s no reason to limit yourself. If ranking on Page 1 for Google isn’t 
possible, ranking #1 in Pinterest or YouTube might be a better option.
And traffic isn’t the end goal. Conversions are. So think beyond traffic. Clearly 
promote your ascension path within your assets, spelling out what they should 
do after consuming your content.
Chapter 06: Designing Your Search
Marketing Strategy196Now let’s look at the entire process, from start to finish.
The 6-Part System in Action
Let’s assume I’m Home Depot and want to create some YouTube videos 
targeting the keyword, “tile my bathroom.” I start by identifying the intent and 
context around that search query. 
Keyword  = “tile my bathroom”
Intent  = to tile my bathroom
Context  = My wife hates the old tile in our bathroom.

Chapter 06: Designing Your Search
Marketing Strategy197Asset  = video on how to tile your floor

Chapter 06: Designing Your Search
Marketing Strategy198Channel  = YouTube 

Chapter 06: Designing Your Search
Marketing Strategy199Optimization  = Use the intent-based keyword in the title and description 
(basic YouTube SEO).

Chapter 06: Designing Your Search
Marketing Strategy200Ascension  = Leverage YouTube’s built-in ascension paths. 
As you can see, this isn’t hard. In fact, it gives you a logical workflow that 
will help you create better content that meets the real needs of your best 
customers. 
You simply need to figure out what you want to rank for, look at the top-
ranking content, and create something better. Then optimize and create your 
ascension path. 
Now let’s look at the lingo used by search marketers.
Chapter 06: Designing Your Search
Marketing Strategy201The Lingo: How does a Search Marketer Talk?
What are the terms you need to know as an SEO? These 4 terms will give you 
a solid foundation for talking about search marketing.
Technical SEO
Technical SEO is about optimizing the structure and code of a website so 
search engines can find, understand, and send traffic to that site.
This is a smart focus if you’re technically minded. Technical SEOs are skilled at 
tweaking code, setting up servers, and finding the technical issues that keep a 
search-engine spider from understanding what your site’s about.
When are technical SEOs called in?
Most websites use a good content management system like Wordpress or 
Shopify. Both are built with solid technical SEO in place, so right out of the 
box, their technical SEO will be good.
But as a site gets bigger, especially if more than one person can make changes 
to the site, it’s almost guaranteed it will develop technical SEO problems at 
some point.
Site hacks are another issue that technical SEOs can help with. Google won’t 
send you traffic if your site gets hacked, and they’ll put you in the penalty box 
until the issue gets resolved.
That’s just two scenarios, but there are countless technical issues that can keep 
your site from performing well in search engines. That’s why technical SEO is 
so important. When you remove the tech problem, your search position can 
get an immediate boost.
Intent
A person’s goal when typing a search query on the web. What information are 
they looking for? What are they hoping to achieve with that information?
If you know your customers’ intent, you’ll be able to find the keywor ds that are 
most relevant to your business. Make a list of the reasons people might buy. 
Chapter 06: Designing Your Search
Marketing Strategy202Those are your top keywords.
Asset
The content produced to satisfy the intent of a customer or prospect. It may 
include blog posts, product pages, social media profiles, podcasts, videos, 
and more.
Once you know the intent of a customer’s search, you need to design an asset 
to satisfy that intent.
Channel
The digital “home” of an asset designed to meet the intent of a customer or 
prospect. Assets might live on a website or blog, but they may also live on 
large content hubs like Amazon, Pinterest, iTunes, and TripAdvisor.
Metrics
What are the metrics that will help you track and improve your search 
marketing? Here are 4 to start with.
Traffic by Channel report
In Google Analytics, this is the first report we typically look at when we get 
access to a site. It tells you a lot at a high level: Where are we hurting? Are 
your traffic sources relatively balanced or does traffic come from just one or 
two channels?

Chapter 06: Designing Your Search
Marketing Strategy203When sites don’t do search marketing, their traffic tends to come from Direct 
or Email. Once search marketing has been implemented, though, you’ll begin 
to see more balance.
Quantity/Quality of Backlinks
Here at DigitalMarketer, we use Moz Open Site Explorer  for this metric. But 
you can use other free tools, such as MonitorBacklinks , or paid tools, such as 
Ahrefs .
You want to track how many websites are linking to your site.
You want to run this report monthly or quarterly to track how many websites 
are linking to your site. That number should be trending upward, with more 
and more quality sites linking to you.
Chapter 06: Designing Your Search
Marketing Strategy204Keyword Rankings
Once you’ve identified the keywords you want to rank for, you need to track 
your position for those keywords.
For this, you can use the SERPs Keyword Rank Checker . Just type in your 
keyword and see where you rank. 
Track where you rank in the SERPs for important keywords.
In this example, we typed in “email subject lines,” and as you can see, we rank 
#4 for that term. 
You can also see who’s outranking you. To make your page rank better, review 
their content and update yours to be 10x better.
Conversions from Search
If you’ve set up Ecommerce or Goals in Google Analytics, you can go to the 
Channels report and look at the top-line revenue and number of transactions 
over time. 
Chapter 06: Designing Your Search
Marketing Strategy205
Google’s channels report is important if you’ve set ecommerce goals.
The metrics to focus on are Sessions, Revenue, and Transactions. Here, we 
have $67,000 from 2,000 transactions. To calculate the conversion rate, divide 
revenue by transactions.
$67,285.55 / 2130 = $31.59 per transaction
The Roles: Who Has Responsibility for Search Marketing?
To succeed at search marketing, you need 3 teams to have input and 
responsibility. 
Chapter 06: Designing Your Search
Marketing Strategy206
The Content Team
Search and content go hand in hand. Understanding SEO will help your 
content team bring in more organic traffic from multiple channels.
IT and Tech Teams
Technical SEO is your tech team’s domain. If they don’t have training in 
technical SEO, they’re probably throwing up some speed bumps that keep 
you from ranking well in search.
Public Relations
As with the content team, your PR team need to understand search marketing 
to achieve their goals.
Summing Up
Search marketing doesn’t happen in a bubble. Ideally it will integrate with 
every aspect of your marketing, from customer research to content creation to 
customer value optimization.
We’ve provided a good overview of how you can do this—but it’s a lot to take 
in at once. The good news is you’ll get better over time. Just start where you 
are, and over time, you’ll see improvements in your page rank and traffic.
Chapter 06: Designing Your Search
Marketing Strategy207The next chapter will help as well—because SEO and analytics go hand in 
hand. And you’ll appreciate our down-to-earth approach to analytics. (It takes 
the fear—and a lot of the pain—of numbers out of the equation.)
Chapter 06: Designing Your Search
Marketing Strategy208Become a Search Marketing Specialist
With all the “noise” in today’s world, it’s critical that brands and business get 
found when a customer or prospect is looking for them. 
It’s also critical that your brand is shown in a positive light when the right 
person is looking for a solution that YOU provide. 
And that’s exactly what you’ll learn how to do in this mastery course: 
How to leverage search channels such as Google, Amazon and even local 
channels such as Yelp. 
How to ensure that your brand gets found.
And when it’s found, how to ensure the message your prospects see is a 
positive one.
Click Here to Learn More »

Chapter 07: Applying Website
Analytics to Your Digital Marketing210What’s your emotional reaction when you hear the word, data?
Stress? Fear? Frustration?
Fortunately, data and analytics don’t have to be scary. In fact, it can be fun (or 
at least interesting) if you know how to turn all those numbers and reports into 
actionable intel you can use to grow your business.
In this chapter, you’ll learn the methodology for doing analytics and data in 
your business, the metrics that matter most, the lingo you’ll use to talk about 
it, and the teams or roles that should be responsible for it.
But first, let’s talk about why data and analytics are so important to a successful 
business.
Why Data Matters
Data comes in two flavors: not enough and too much.
The challenge most people struggle with is how to turn numbers into 
meaningful decisions. Static numbers, in and of themselves, are meaningless.
So why would you want to do analytics?
To understand the answer, let’s review some examples:
The Oakland A’s Athletics Club
Billy Beane took over as the General Manager of the Oakland A’s in 1997. 
There, he applied statistical analysis (known as sabermetrics ) to players, 
radically changing the way they acquired players. CHAPTER
07
Chapter 07: Applying Website
Analytics to Your Digital Marketing211
Billy Beane, General Manager of the Oakland A’s ( Source )
Beane’s approach was to focus on specific metrics, such as batting and runs, to 
find undervalued players no one else was noticing. This approached made the 
Oakland A’s one of the most cost-effective teams in baseball and carried them 
through 20 consecutive wins, playoffs, and even the world series. 
Essentially, data made the A’s competitive with much bigger clubs while 
working on a budget a third of the size.
Netflix 
Netflix’s core belief is that customization wins customer loyalty, a belief that 
puts data at the center of their corporate strategy. 
When they were still a DVD rental company, Netflix invested heavily in data 
mining technology to develop a movie recommendation algorithm, leading 
the way in using data to provide a great customer experience. And it worked. 
Recommendations drove 50% of their traffic.
After adopting a streaming model, this data-first approach continued, and it’s 
made them one of the top streaming video-on-demand services available. 
Chapter 07: Applying Website
Analytics to Your Digital Marketing212Today, it’s giving them the customer insight they need to create massively 
successful original content like Daredevil , House of Cards  and Orange is the 
New Black .
Netflix’s data gives them the insight to develop massively                    
successful content. ( Source )
None of this would have been possible without data.
DigitalMarketer
We’re no strangers to data either. I’ll get into more detail later in this chapter, 
but here at DM, we rely on data to help us make business decisions that are all 
but guaranteed to work. 
Our belief? Gut instincts may be good, but data never lies.
The challenge, of course, is in your methods. How do you go from the 
spreadsheet to strategic decisions that grow your business? Let’s take a look.
Chapter 07: Applying Website
Analytics to Your Digital Marketing213The Methods of a Well-Executed Analytics & Data 
Strategy
To master analytics and data, you need to master 3 guiding principles:
• Give data a job.  This is the foundation of data analysis. Every piece 
of data you gather should help you answer questions and make smart 
decisions.
• Use hypothesis testing to convert questions into strategies.  This is 
what makes data meaningful. It’s the process of transforming raw data into 
business decisions.
• Apply context to account for the unmeasurable.  Some things are hard to 
measure. For those situation, you need to contextualize the data. 
Analytics and data shouldn’t be stressful. But it’s easy to feel that way when 
there are so many sources to draw from, each formatting the data differently, 
sometimes even giving different numbers for the same metric. 
Where do you put your attention? How to compare the data from different 
sources?
To start, give your data a job.
Principle #1: Give your Data a Job
One of the easiest ways to understand data is to think of the marketing funnel.
Chapter 07: Applying Website
Analytics to Your Digital Marketing214
The marketing funnel
This is a foundational concept that makes it easy to visualize customer 
acquisition in marketing. Your brand marketing creates awareness and attracts 
new visitors to your website. Some of these new leads will be interested 
enough to evaluate your business and products, and a percentage of them will 
go on to become customers. 
For sales, that’s a good model, but we need to tweak the funnel to work as 
well for analytics and data.
This model is a funnel metrics flowchart that not only maps the stages of a 
customer’s journey, it also lists the metrics that should be measured at each 
stage. 
Chapter 07: Applying Website
Analytics to Your Digital Marketing215
Funnel Metrics Flowchart
With this approach, we use the same 3 phases of the funnel but rename them 
like this:
1. TOFU , or top of funnel, is the awareness phase
2. MOFU , or middle of funnel, is the evaluation phase
3. BOFU , or bottom of funnel, is the conversion phase
Chapter 07: Applying Website
Analytics to Your Digital Marketing216But we don’t want to stop there. We also need to measure what happens after 
someone becomes a customer. 
So we add one more stage: the post-conversion phase , which focuses on 
how customers can be turned into repeat customers, life-time subscribers, and 
advocates for your business.
This is how you give your data a job. You don’t look at all your data at once. 
You assign different metrics to each stage of the funnel.  
Rather than measuring your business’s health only by its bottom-line numbers, 
you measure its health at every phase—identifying leaks in your funnel, finding 
strategic ways to plug them up, and making it easier to convert.
To begin, let’s identify the funnel metrics you need for each stage of your 
customers’ journey.
Categorizing Data by The Stage of the Funnel
TOFU (Top of Funnel)
Your goal for this stage? New visitors.
Top-of-the-Funnel metrics
The key question when choosing metrics for this stage is this: Does this metric 
give me insight into brand-new visitors? 
Chapter 07: Applying Website
Analytics to Your Digital Marketing217A good example of a TOFU metric: Direct new visitors.
Direct new visitors is the number of people who are typing your website URL 
directly into Google? It can measure the effectiveness of online and offline 
advertising:
If you’ve been running awareness ads, you should see spikes from people 
trying to learn more about you.
If you have billboards that include your URL, you should see a spike in the 
geo-areas surrounding the billboard as they visit your site.
MOFU (Middle of Funnel)
Your goal at this stage? Converting new visitors into leads.
 
Middle-of-the-Funnel metrics
Chapter 07: Applying Website
Analytics to Your Digital Marketing218Your guiding question when deciding whether a metric is right for the middle 
of the funnel is this: Does this metric give me insight into how well I’m getting 
visitors to commit?
“Commitment” can be definied as:
• People subscribing
• People filling out a webform 
• People following you in social media 
It’s about people giving you permission to reach out to them and offer more 
value.
A good example of a MOFU metric: CTA clicks. 
If you have a blog post with a banner to learn more about one of your 
products. You need to know how many clicks that banner is getting and what 
percentage of your blog visitors are clicking so you can evaluate how well your 
content is converting visitors into leads.
BOFU (Bottom of Funnel)
Your goal? Converting prospects into customers.
Chapter 07: Applying Website
Analytics to Your Digital Marketing219
Bottom-of-the-Funnel metrics
Your guiding question when choosing metrics for this stage: Does this metric 
give me insight into how well prospects convert into customers?
This stage is especially important because, once someone buys something 
from you—even something small and inexpensive—the likelihood that they’ll 
buy again increases 10-fold, and their willingness to invest in the relationship 
significantly increases.
An good example of a BOFU metric: conversion percentage.
How many people clicked or purchased from a brand communication? This 
tells you which offers are working and what kind of offers you should make to 
new customers.
Chapter 07: Applying Website
Analytics to Your Digital Marketing220Retention & Monetization (After Conversion)
Your goal for this stage? Customer satisfaction. You want to increase 
membership, traffic ROI, retention, and customer lifetime value.
Post-Conversion metrics
The guiding question when looking at post-conversion metrics: Does this 
metric give me insight into how satisfied our customers are?
You’re looking for metrics that describe real results from using your product. 
Something like this:
Post-sale metrics give you insight into customer satisfaction.

Chapter 07: Applying Website
Analytics to Your Digital Marketing221This data isn’t waiting for you on Google, so it’s harder to come by, but 
satisfied customers are usually willing to share them. Here at DM, we look for 
positive reviews from people in our membership area. That tells us how well 
we’re helping people reach their goals.
Keep in mind, these aren’t vanity metrics. They help us know what it takes to 
keep people in DM Lab and encourage them tell their friends about the Lab.
Example of a post-conversion: the Members On/Off report
This report tracks how many people we’re adding to a subscription product, 
how many people we’re losing, and how we’re losing them. 
These metrics tell us how healthy the product is, and when they’re combined 
with other reports, we can see the things we do that drive cancellations or 
boost membership. This information is critical for a membership product 
because member retention drives profits.
Categorizing Data by Type
We’ve just reviewed TOFU, MOFU, and BOFU metrics, which is a way of 
categorizing metrics by the stages of your funnel. But there’s another ways to 
categorize metrics, and that’s by the type of information they provide. 
There are 2 types  of metrics:
Key metrics dictate overall health.  These metrics are like a thermometer for 
your business. For a metric to be key, you need to be able to look at it and 
know immediately whether your business is doing well or not.
Chapter 07: Applying Website
Analytics to Your Digital Marketing222Drill-down metrics answer big questions.  These metrics are more granular 
and help you understand what’s going on in specific areas of your business. 
Typically, you use both types of metrics together, not one or the other. If key 
metrics tell you things are going well, you use drill-down metrics to help you 
understand why, so you can replicate your success.
For example: 
Improving On-site Banner Clickthrough 
The Average Banner Click % is a key metric. It tells you, across your entire site, 
how likely it is for a visitor to click on a banner ad in one of your articles.
To help us understand why the click rate is 3.25% and how we can improve 
that number, we need a drill-down metric: How likely is a visitor to click on a 
banner ad in one specific article?
Not long ago, we did this for the DM blog. After reviewing all our blog posts 
and drilling down for specific metrics, we were able to identify the factors that 
impact the click rate. After applying our findings, we improved the banner ad 
clickthrough rate by about 2% across the blog. 
Chapter 07: Applying Website
Analytics to Your Digital Marketing223Improving Search Traffic
In this example, the key metric is New Visitors: How many first-time visitors are 
landing on your website?
To learn more, the drill-down metric would be Share of Search: What 
percentage of search traffic is owned by what person or brand? 
Here, you’d compare how much search traffic you’re getting for a keyword to 
how much your competitors are getting from that same keyword. This would 
allow you to find areas where you can compete with much larger businesses 
because you own the keyword. Alternatively, it will tell you which keywords 
you need to put some work into.
Improving Ecommerce

Chapter 07: Applying Website
Analytics to Your Digital Marketing224And in this example, the key metric is Average Order Value. To drill down, 
you’d need to look at actual orders.  
You want to know where the bulk of the revenue from your Average Order 
Value is coming from. This could reveal that you need to move things around 
in your sales funnel or that you need to push one promotion over another 
because its average order value is much higher.
As you can see, there are 2 ways you can give your metrics a job. 
• You can assign them to a specific stage of the funnel: TOFU, MOFU, OR 
BOFU.
• You can use them to measure the health of different areas in your business 
and then answer deeper questions about how and why.
Once you understand the overall health of your business and where things are 
working (or not), you can begin to use metrics for problem solving.
Principle #2: Using Metrics to Solve Problems
Data is collected on a dashboard, right? But on the dashboard, it’s raw data. 
Your job, as data analyst, is to turn raw data into active data. 
For that, you use the analytic decision-making process.
Chapter 07: Applying Website
Analytics to Your Digital Marketing225
This process works a lot like the scientific method, except it’s based on 
metrics.
In the scientific method, you start with questions and hypotheses, and 
then you make predictions about what might happen if you test different 
hypotheses. 
Chapter 07: Applying Website
Analytics to Your Digital Marketing226It’s the same with data and analytics. You review your data and start asking 
questions about it. You make hypotheses about what might happen if you 
could impact any of those numbers. And then you devise a test to see if you’re 
right.
Simply by reviewing the results, you can clearly see what needs to be done to 
improve your business. Making decisions is no longer about your gut instincts, 
but about what the data is telling you. 
That’s the theory, anyway. 
But in practice, we often don’t know enough to know what questions we 
should be asking. In those situations, it often helps to take another data dive.
Reviewing Key Metrics to Inspire Questions
When you don’t know enough to know what you should be asking, your 
metrics will often give you the insight you need.
Step 1. Start by Reviewing Your Key Metrics. Identify the places where your 
performance is better than expected or, perhaps, trending downward. In many 
cases, this will inspire questions.
• This blog post’s traffic is double most other blog posts. What made it 
perform better?
• We’re getting new subscribers every day, but our total subscriptions are 
staying the same. What’s happening? Where are we losing subscribers? 
Why?
• Every time writer SM writes a blog post, traffic and shares are higher than 
normal. What makes her blog posts better than anyone else’s?
As an example, when reviewing the Member’s On/Off report for the 
DigitalMarketer Lab, we saw some weird inconsistencies in the Members 
Added column
Chapter 07: Applying Website
Analytics to Your Digital Marketing227
The Member’s On/Off report for DigitalMarketer Lab
Some weeks, we’d add 131, 112, or 106 new members. In other weeks, we’d 
only add 11 or 21. After seeing these numbers, some questions sprang to 
mind:
• What’s causing these spikes in subscriber conversions?
• What’s causing these periods of lower conversion?
Step 2. Generate a Hypothesis About What’s Happening. Make some 
predictions about what’s going on. For our Member’s Added inconsistency, we 
made three guesses:
• The $1 trial is a better offer because it converts more visitors for all traffic 
sources.
• The $1 trial churn is higher than that of full-pay members, meaning it 
doesn’t contribute to our goal of growing the lab.
• People keep restarting the $1 trial offer after their time expires, inflating 
conversion percentages.
Hint: Don’t settle for just one hypothesis. It’s best to consider multiple 
explanations—ideally 5 to 7 hypotheses—and test them all. Otherwise you 
limit your ability to learn what’s going on.
Chapter 07: Applying Website
Analytics to Your Digital Marketing228You see, in most cases, there isn’t just one reason for the issue you’re 
seeing. Several factors may contribute to the success or failure you want 
to understand. The more hypotheses you have, the better your chances of 
isolating all the factors involved.
Step 3. Use Drill-Down Metrics to Test Hypotheses. For this, you’ll use more 
detailed, granular data to figure out what’s causing the issue you’re trying to 
understand. 
This data isn’t usually reviewed on a daily basis, but it exists, and you know 
where to find it. It’s also the data that helps you answer these kinds of 
questions. 
For this particular question, we used cohort analyses to test our 3 hypotheses. 
We developed 7 cohorts, or different ways you could group the people in DM 
Lab, including cancellation date, average percentage paid, how long they 
were active, and more.
After reviewing all that information, we realized that the $1 trial was a better 
front-end offer than the full-pay offer. 
Step 4. Take Action Based on Your Findings. The conclusion of our data 
analysis was that the trial offer generates more paying customers than 
average. For every 100 people we put into DM Lab, 21 came from the trial, 
while 20 came from the full-pay offer. 
While that’s not a significant difference, over time, it can add up. So we 
changed our front-end offer. The $1 trial offer is now our primary offer, and so 
far, it’s yielded an extra 1,000 Lab members.
Principle #3: Contextualizing Data to Account for the 
Unmeasurable
It doesn’t matter how good your data is, sometimes it doesn’t tell you 
everything you need to know. 
Chapter 07: Applying Website
Analytics to Your Digital Marketing229For instance, let’s say you’re reviewing your data and you see a trend. Why 
is that trend taking shape? Maybe you ran a campaign during that period. 
Maybe your competitors did something unique. Or maybe you had a 
technology problem that skewed the data. 
If you don’t consider these factors when evaluating your data, you’re likely to 
make an assumption based on a false set of data. Your conclusion won’t be 
valid. 
In these situations, context helps you account for variances in your data. And 
there are 4 contexts you need to consider.
4 contexts help you interpret your data.
Chapter 07: Applying Website
Analytics to Your Digital Marketing230Historical Contexts
What does history tell you to expect? By reviewing data through a historical 
lens, you can understand trends and typical behavior among your customers. 
For instance, at DigitalMarketer, we’ve noted that sales dip in the summer. 
Consistently. Every summer. 
So rather than worrying about lower numbers, we’ve come up with strategies 
for boosting sales in late spring. We also reduce ad spend in the summer 
because we know the ROI won’t be as good.
External Contexts
What changes outside our control have influenced our metrics? Maybe a 
new competitor has entered the market. Or maybe technology has changed, 
necessitating major changes in the way you do things. 
Think Google algorithm updates.
External factors may be outside your control, but you need to keep them in 
mind when evaluating performance.
Internal Contexts
Have you made changes to your strategy that impact your performance? Have 
you made changes to your site or launched a campaign? 
This is more of a self-review. Think through the changes you’ve made internally 
that might have affected your numbers.
Contextual Contexts
This has to do with how you’re pulling the data. Are you comparing raw 
numbers or percentages? Are your numbers skewed by outliers? Do you have 
data that doesn’t make sense because of an internal or external factor? 
Together, these contextual factors help you account for the immeasurable  
things, the things you can’t foresee or explain in your data. And they help you 
evaluable the validity of your data.
Chapter 07: Applying Website
Analytics to Your Digital Marketing231Making Data Actionable
As you can see, the 3 principles of well-executed analytics and data can help 
you turn random numbers into actionable tasks for your business. 
You need to assign roles to your data so you know the stage of the funnel they 
relate to and whether they help you know something (key metric) or give you 
information to answer a question (drill-down metrics).
You also need to use data to make smarter decisions for your business. Use 
it to test your ideas about what’s working and what’s not and how you might 
improve results. When you review the numbers to answer a question, you 
know what you’re trying to prove or disprove. 
Then finally, you need to put your data into context by evaluating the factors 
that might be driving numbers up or down. By tying data to the real world, 
the numbers will make more sense and it will be easier to use them in your 
business to drive growth.
The Lingo Analysts Use
There are 5 terms you must understand to talk intelligently about analytics and 
data.
Analytical Decision Making
This refers to the data scientist’s scientific method. It’s the process you’ll use 
to identify the questions you should be asking and the best methods for 
answering them.
Analyst’s Toolkit
These are the tools, templates, and resources you’ll use to turn concepts and 
ideas into data and reports. Your toolkit will help you ask the right questions 
and develop a process that makes data analysis easier.
Chapter 07: Applying Website
Analytics to Your Digital Marketing232UTM Parameter
This refers to the code you can append to a URL to give you more information 
about where your traffic is coming from. 
How to use UTM parameters
In this example, the yellow highlight shows you the actual link. Everything after 
that is a UTM parameter. It’s this extra information that helps you track your 
traffic sources.
• Green highlights the source , which tells you the audience or referring site 
(house list).
• Pink highlights the medium , which tells you how this traffic was referred 
(email).
• Blue highlights the content , which is your ad/content identifier (data cert 
launch email1).
• Gray highlights your campaign , which identifies the promotion or strategy 
this traffic came from (data cert 1-1-2016).
When you add UTM parameters to your links, anyone who clicks on those links 
will be tagged, and you can track those tags in Google Analytics. 
This allows you to see which sources and communications are giving you the 
best traffic. 
Chapter 07: Applying Website
Analytics to Your Digital Marketing233Key Performance Indicator (KPI)
KPI is another way to refer to a metric in general, and it’s usually used to talk 
about a metric that someone thinks is driving their business. KPI is another 
way to talk about a key metric .
Dashboard
A dashboard is a web page that collates your metrics from a particular source. 
You’ll likely have a dashboard for each data source: Google Analytics, your 
email service provider, your social media platforms, and more. 
Most dashboards also provide graphs that turn your data into visuals, making 
it easy to see how well you’re performing. 
Dashboards give you at-a-glance understanding of what’s working.
Chapter 07: Applying Website
Analytics to Your Digital Marketing234Dashboards should be available to everyone on a team. They help you easily 
understand what’s going on in a business, which helps team members see how 
their work is impacting the success of your business. 
The Roles: Who Needs to Be in the Know?
Who should own your business’s data? Where in the company does data 
analysis live?
Data & Analytics
The analytics team (or individual) should have primary responsibility for 
gathering, vetting, and interpreting your data and analytics. 
Larger teams may also have a data implementation manager, who aggregates 
all this information and turns it into a beautiful dashboard that’s easy to 
understand.
Marketing
Every marketer worth their salt needs to know a little about analytics and data. 
Whether you’re running Facebook campaigns, tweeting 50 times a day, or 
posting articles to your blog, you need to know what’s working and what’s not.
Chapter 07: Applying Website
Analytics to Your Digital Marketing235Conversion Rate Optimization (CRO)
The people who run tests to optimize your marketing rely heavily on data to 
develop their hypotheses, set up tests, and measure performance.
Summing Up
Analytics doesn’t have to be scary or overwhelming—even if you’re not a 
numbers person. You simply need a process for dealing with the numbers, a 
way to figure out which ones will help you identify opportunities and which 
ones to ignore.
Once you’ve got your process in place, you may actually find you enjoy 
analytics. There’s no better feeling than knowing without a doubt that 
your marketing plan is working—and it’s the metrics that will give you that 
confidence.
We’re nearing the end of our digital marketing overview. The next (and final) 
lesson is conversion rate optimization, which is a simple process for improving 
your marketing results over time. 
Honestly, conversion rate optimization, or CRO, as it’s often called, is the 
secret sauce for your digital marketing strategy, and you’ll love how it focuses 
your energy on the tasks that matter most.
Chapter 07: Applying Website
Analytics to Your Digital Marketing236Become an Analytics & Data Specialist
Data and analytics are essential to a modern digital marketing strategy—and 
they’re key to growing your business. 
To succeed today, you need to master the 3 principles covered in this chapter 
and develop an effective process for organizing all your data, evaluating it, 
and turning it into smart business decisions. 
DigitalMarketer’s Analytics & Data Specialist Mastery course gives you the 
training you need to:
• Build a compete analytics dashboard that reveals the overall health of your 
company in one glance.
• Turn raw numbers into meaningful action, using an 8-step flowchart that 
guides you step-by-step through the process. 
• Identify the traffic sources that are most valuable to your business, so you 
get the best possible ROI from  your marketing.
Click Here to Learn More »

Chapter 08: Leveraging Conversion Rate
Optimization to Drive Growth238You know what’s sad?
Only a fifth of businesses are satisfied with their conversion rates*. 
One fifth!
Which is why smart businesses are making conversion rate optimization 
(CRO) an integral part of their digital marketing strategy.
But conversion rate optimization is a bit of a misnomer. 
Conversion  doesn’t just mean a sale. It’s whatever you definite it to be. And 
unless you define what you mean by “conversion,” you can’t improve the 
experience.
Here’s the bottom line: if you want to improve your conversion rates, you 
must learn to articulate things better and improve the experience so people 
can perform the action you’re asking them to take.
In this Guide, we’ve covered the foundations of an effective digital 
marketing strategy, everything from content and advertising to social media 
and email marketing to SEO and analytics.
But to succeed as a digital marketer, you also need to know how to optimize 
your marketing over time—making small tweaks that can turn 1% returns 
into 10% or even higher returns.
In this chapter, we’ll help you do just that. We’ll talk about the optimization 
methodology, a repeatable process you can go through to improve 
results on your website. We’ll also cover the lingo you need to know as an 
optimizer, the metrics you need to be measuring, and the roles within your 
organization that will be responsible for it.CHAPTER
08
Chapter 08: Leveraging Conversion Rate
Optimization to Drive Growth239The Methods of Well-Executed Conversion Rate 
Optimization
Let’s begin with some basics…
The main goal of optimization is to improve conversion rates of the traffic you 
already have , and generally, with the assets you already have.
It’s also important to understand that optimization is a dedicated, repeatable 
process. It’s not a once-and-done activity. You’ll work through the process, 
then begin again. And since you can always improve your results—no matter 
how much you improve them—you’ll continue optimizing as long as you’re in 
business.
That’s why we describe the CRO process as a cycle:
The CRO Cycle
Chapter 08: Leveraging Conversion Rate
Optimization to Drive Growth240You start by identifying your goals. You gather relevant data, analyze it, and 
create a hypothesis. You design your variants, implement technology and test 
your hypothesis. Then you analyze results, which will give you new insights and 
ideas for new tests. 
Then the process starts all over. With optimization and testing, this cycle never 
ends. At least, not if you’re doing it right.
Now let’s talk about what you’ll do at each stage of the cycle.
Identify Your Goals 
The process starts with a clearly articulated goal. Remember, without clear 
goals, you can’t optimize anything. You must know what you’re trying to 
achieve.
So let’s say you’re trying to optimize your homepage. We’ll use the 
DigitalMarketer homepage as an example. 
Keep in mind, though, homepages are actually one of the most difficult pages 
to optimize because they’ve got to perform so many different tasks—and 
everyone wants to prioritize their own goals. The sales team is looking for 
qualified leads. The acquisition team is looking at how they can convert the 
traffic into emails. 
You get the idea. Everyone is competing for shelf space on the homepage.
Chapter 08: Leveraging Conversion Rate
Optimization to Drive Growth241
Your homepage is your “you are here” message
But here’s the bottom line: A homepage is your “you are here” message for 
new visitors. They’re trying to figure out if your business is relevant to them, 
and if so, where they are and where they need to go. 
To optimize this experience, you’ll need to set one or more of 3 goal types:
1. An immediate goal, such as clicks or on-page form completion.
2. A campaign goal, such as leads generated or purchases.
3. A long-term goal, like impacting your long-term value, net revenue, 
average order value, or lead quality.
Looking at the DM homepage, you can see our top goal is the first type, an 
immediate goal. We want to get people to give us their email address. 
But we need to optimize the entire experience, so let’s look at the page they 
land on when they click the “Get Your Invitation” button. 
They land on this page…
Chapter 08: Leveraging Conversion Rate
Optimization to Drive Growth242
Optimizing for a long-term goal: identifying the right product                         
for new prospects.
This page achieves the 3rd type of goal, a long-term goal, and it helps us on 
the front-end and the back-end. The information we gather here lets us qualify 
people for the right product, either DM Lab or HQ.
For us, this is important because it helps us gauge the quality of the leads 
we’re generating, and it helps us drive new subscribers to the product that’s 
best for them. 
Gather Data
Once you’ve set your goal, you need to set a baseline for your metrics. For 
each, log your current number, your aspiring number (the number you’re 
aiming for), and your user data. 
Gather that data prior to making any assumptions.
Which brings us to rule #1 for optimizers: leave all assumptions at the door.
Chapter 08: Leveraging Conversion Rate
Optimization to Drive Growth243You and everyone else in your business have ideas about what works, what 
doesn’t work, what your visitors are looking for, and more. But those ideas are 
merely assumptions. 
You must never make decisions based on assumptions. Test your ideas, and let 
your visitors tell you what works for them.
So where do you get your data? 
• For site metrics, go to Google Analytics.
• For user behavior metrics, use a tool like TruConversion.
• For customer and email data, use the data provided by your email service: 
ConvertKit, Infusionsoft, Aweber, etc. 
• For payment data, look at your payment processor: Stripe, Paypal, etc.
Different types of data are shared in reports like this one from Google 
Analytics, which tells you about the traffic on the page you’re trying to 
optimize.
Google Analytics is a good source for data.
Chapter 08: Leveraging Conversion Rate
Optimization to Drive Growth244User behavior reports might look like this one from TruConversion. It shows us 
where people are clicking when they’re on the page, uncovering areas where 
we could improve the user experience.
TruConversion behavior reports tell you where people are                        
clicking on the page.
Analyze Data
The key to CRO success is to use relevant data (which you just gathered) to 
develop meaningful optimization campaigns.
Review your numbers and ask yourself questions like these:
• What’s my conversion rate? (And is it acceptable?) Use analytics or CRM 
data to find the answers.
• What’s hurting my conversion rate?  Use the user behavior data to figure 
this out.
Chapter 08: Leveraging Conversion Rate
Optimization to Drive Growth245• How or why is it hurting my conversion rate? To answer this question, 
you’ll move to the next step in the CRO process and develop a hypothesis.
Develop Hypotheses
This is where all optimization begins.
If you don’t have a hypothesis, you can’t optimize because you don’t know 
what you’re trying to improve.
At this stage of the process, you have your data and you’ve identified the 
elements that are likely hurting your conversion rates. Now you need to make 
some guesses about how you could fix the issue you’ve identified. 
How do you make a hypothesis?
It’s as simple as creating a statement containing these 3 elements:
1. The change or approach you plan to test.
2. Who you’re targeting with this change.
3. The outcome you expect to see.
The format should be something like this:
We believe that doing [1] for [2] will make [3] happen
Notice that your hypothesis is about your intent. You need to be very precise 
about the outcome you’re aiming for. You also need to be sure it’s something 
you can measure and will improve your results in a specific way.
Design Variants
You’ll use your new hypothesis, along with your data, to create the variations 
you’re going to test.
Keep in mind, testing takes time—not just to create the set up the tests, but to 
run them. 
Chapter 08: Leveraging Conversion Rate
Optimization to Drive Growth246And while there’s no limit to the number of tests you can run on a site at 
any given time, if your site doesn’t get a lot of traffic, you’ll need to limit the 
number of tests you run—it simply takes too long to run a test and get valid 
results if your site is small. 
That being the case, if you don’t get a lot of traffic, plan to run no more than 
about 29 tests per year. 
Which means you need to pick the right tests to run. You’ll need to hone your 
ability to identify and justify the page you want to optimize. 
Here’s a typical timetable for setting up and running a test:
Typical timetable for CRO tests
Notice Step 6 is to monitor your test. Once a test is running, you want to 
monitor it carefully on the first day it’s live. In particular, look for anything that’s 
broken or isn’t working as planned. 
If you’ve designed a simple test and nothing’s broken, it will take 9 to 11 days 
to get it up and running. But hiccups happen, so be prepared for tech issues 
and other glitches that could add a few days to this timetable.
Chapter 08: Leveraging Conversion Rate
Optimization to Drive Growth247Now let’s look at how that might play out in real-life testing situations.
Changing the Button Copy
This test is braindead simple. It only involves a few copy changes, which 
means it could be set up quickly. But it’s not very meaningful, and it’s not 
scalable at all. What you learn from this test won’t impact other tests in a 
significant way.
Testing the button copy
New Tripwire Control Page
This test, for the DigitalMarketer site, is a lot more complicated. Because it’s a 
major redesign, it will take longer to set up and to implement. But we’ll learn 
a lot more, and our findings can be applied across our other tripwire pages, so 
it’s very scalable.
Chapter 08: Leveraging Conversion Rate
Optimization to Drive Growth248
Testing a page redesign
TIP: For a complicated test like this one, you’ll want to create a mockup, then 
build it in a landing page builder. Once your variant has been tested and 
proved, you’ll then want to scale it across all similar offers, so the results you 
gained from this test can be applied to all related pages. In this case, it took a 
month to do that.
Implement Testing Technology
Once your variant is made, you want to implement all the necessary 
technology to make the changes you’re testing.
Chapter 08: Leveraging Conversion Rate
Optimization to Drive Growth249You can’t do this without the right technology. You’re going to need some 
tools like Visual Website Optimizer, Google Analytics, and TruConversion.
Run Your Test 
It’s as important to know when and when not to run a test. For that, you need 
to qualify your test.
First, ask yourself: can you run the test?
The length of your test depends on the number of variants being tested and 
your conversions/day.
Every test should run until it achieves statistical relevance —otherwise you 
can’t trust the results of your test. But the length of time it takes to reach 
statistical relevance depends on the number of variants you’re testing and the 
number of conversions you have per day. 
What is “statistical relevance”?  It’s how you mathematically prove that your 
test’s outcome is reliable. If you end a test too early, you won’t have enough 
data from the test to verify that your hypothesis was true. It might not be—and 
if you had run the test longer, the numbers would have proven it.
Chapter 08: Leveraging Conversion Rate
Optimization to Drive Growth250But statistical relevance is hard to get when you don’t have much traffic. No 
traffic means no data, after all.
So if you’re testing 2 variants in your test, and you get 5 conversions per day, 
you’ll need to run your test for 49 days to be able to trust your test’s results. 
(See the chart above.)
If you’re testing 3 variants and get 3 conversions a day, guess what? You’re not 
on the chart. You’ve got to ask yourself: should  you run the test.
Not only that: not all tests need to be completed. 
Once you’ve set up your test, if you see indications that it’s broken or 
obviously failing, you can pull the plug. (It’s okay. Really.)
For instance, on Day 1, if your results tank, something is broken. Stop the 
test and diagnose the problem. If, on Day 12, your numbers are still 80% 
down, the test isn’t working. You need a pragmatic approach to know how to 
respond. 
As a CRO, your goal is to mitigate risk while testing new ideas. So if a test is 
performing badly and the traffic source is organic, you can probably afford to 
keep it running. If it’s a paid traffic source, you’re losing money the longer a 
failed test runs. You should probably end it sooner than later.
Here’s the test for whether you should run a test:
• Is this a functional issue with no ambiguity toward the solution? If it’s just a 
functional issue, you don’t test.
• Does this page directly impact long-term or campaign goals? If yes, run 
the test.
• Is there something else you can test that will have a bigger impact? If so, 
do that instead.
• Are these learnings scalable to other parts of the site? If not, tread 
carefully. You’ll get more value from a test whose results impact multiple 
pages on your site than on a test that only tells you one thing.
Chapter 08: Leveraging Conversion Rate
Optimization to Drive Growth251• Can I launch the test (or winning variant) in a reasonable timeframe? If 
you don’t have the resources to run the test or implement the winner, you 
shouldn’t run the test—it’s a waste of time.
Analyze the Data
After running a test, you need to analyze the results. This gives you the “why” 
and fuels your next campaign.
During this stage of the process, you perform 5 essential tasks:
• Share lifts or losses
• Figure out “why”
• Write a report
• Archive your data
• Share the results with stakeholders
In your report, you want to include the name of the test, the timeline, metrics, 
visually, show the variants, and break down the long-form numbers. Then 
move into what you learned from the test and what needs to be done as a 
result.
During analysis, you need to ask these questions:
• Did you see a lift, loss, or a null?
• If results went against the hypothesis, why?
• Is it worth retesting? Maybe there were unusual circumstances around the 
test that make the results questionable.
• How can the data be used in future experiments?
Now, use these findings to set new goals and begin the process again. 
Chapter 08: Leveraging Conversion Rate
Optimization to Drive Growth252As mentioned above, testing and optimizing should become a normal part 
of your marketing plan. Each test should lead to another, and every small 
improvement will add up to significant growth.
The Lingo of Optimization and Testing
These are the terms you need to know to talk intelligently about conversion 
rate optimization.
Conversion
The visitor action you’re hoping to improve with the campaign (e.g., 
registering for a webinar, adding a product to the shopping cart, etc.).
Be aware, you must define your conversion actions. Clearly identify what 
you’re testing, what you’re aiming for, and the metric that matters most in 
measuring your results. 
Control
The page in the experiment that does not receive the treatment. In conversion 
testing, the control is the version of the page that currently converts best. Any 
new variation is tested against the control.
So in an A/B test, the control is A. Your test version, or variation (see below), is 
B.
Variation
The page in the experiment that has received the treatment you’re testing. For 
example, the variation page might have a shorter lead form than the control 
page.
TIP: Name your variants in the test so it’s easy to identify the key element in 
each. Something like this:
• Control – full form
• Variant 1 – shortened form
Chapter 08: Leveraging Conversion Rate
Optimization to Drive Growth253• Variant 2 – email only
• Variant 3 – form + survey
Quantitative Data
This is any data that can be measured numerically. The “number stuff,” such 
as:
• Unique visits
• Sign-ups
• Purchases
• Order value
• Qualitative Data
This is the descriptive data. The “people stuff” that’s more difficult to analyze 
but often gives context to your quantitative data. This would include: 
• Heatmaps
• Session recordings
• Form analytics
The Metrics
Optimizers live and die by the numbers. So what are the numbers that matter 
most when you’re testing?
Conversion Rate
This is calculated by dividing the number of conversion (whatever you defined) 
by the total number of visitors to the page you’re testing. 
Chapter 08: Leveraging Conversion Rate
Optimization to Drive Growth254For example:
Lift Percentage
The percentage change between two variants (not the difference between the 
two numbers).
To calculate lift percentage, use this formula:
In this case, while the difference is 1%, the lift percentage  is 10%.
Confidence Rate
Technically speaking, this is: “The percentage of instances that a set of 
similarly constructed tests will capture the true mean (accuracy) of the system 
being tested within a specified range of values around the measured accuracy 
value of each test.”
In layman’s terms, you’re trying to avoid false positives. So the confidence rate 
shows how sure you are that your test is accurate. 
For instance, let’s say your confidence rate is 95%. That would indicate that 
if you were to run the campaign 100 times, 95 of the tests would show your 
variant a winner. 
Chapter 08: Leveraging Conversion Rate
Optimization to Drive Growth255A common mistake is to interpret this as the “odds” of you getting your same 
results. As if a 95% confidence rate meant there’s a 95% chance you’ll get the 
same results from another test. 
We’re not talking odds. We’re calculating the accuracy. In every test, you’ll see 
slight differences. The confidence rate indicates you’ll see difference but not 
the degree of difference.
Conversion Range
“Conversion rate” is a misnomer. It makes it sound like your tests will give you 
one precise number that you can call the “conversion rate.”
In reality, expect to see conversions within a range—not as a precise number. 
So 30.86% to 36.38%, with 33.59 as the mean.
The conversion rate (range) should not overlap as it does here.
Chapter 08: Leveraging Conversion Rate
Optimization to Drive Growth256Notice that the two tests overlap slightly. Your goal is to break the overlap, so 
your winning variant is a clear winner.
The Roles: Who on Your Team Owns CRO?
These are the 3 roles that typically have responsibility for optimization and 
testing.
Acquisition
Anyone responsible for acquiring new leads and customers should know how 
to optimize for more conversions. 
Even when this role doesn’t do the actual optimization, they need to be able 
to identify whether lower-than-expected results are from poor targeting or on-
page issues.
Marketing
Every marketing professional should understand the strategy behind 
conversion rate optimization at every stage of the funnel.
They need to understand the basics of optimization (at the very least), so they 
can identify the source of whatever issues arise—whether they’re a problem 
with optimization, acquisition, or qualifying. 
Chapter 08: Leveraging Conversion Rate
Optimization to Drive Growth257IT/Web Developer or Designer
Conversion rate optimization often has technical elements that require the 
assistance of the tech team members who build web pages.
Be sure these people know what your tests are about. Sometimes, the 
changes you’re asking for aren’t best-practice from a designer’s point of view, 
and it helps them to understand what they’re creating and why.
Also, if you’re using optimization tools that allow you to make changes on 
your own, give all stakeholders a heads up about your test. Otherwise, they’ll 
see the changes on the website and wonder why the “approved” language or 
design has been changed.
Bottom Line
If you don’t want to be one of the marketers who are unhappy with their 
conversion rates, you’ve got to change your approach to digital marketing.
You can’t just wing it and except to see results.
The only way to raise your conversion rates is to begin testing and optimizing.
These aren’t once-and-done activities, either. They need to become part of 
your business’ culture if you’re serious about growing your business.
Which brings us full circle…
We created The Ultimate Guide to Digital Marketing  to help you understand 
the tactics that you need to master to succeed as a digital marketer. 
So what’s next?
Click through to the final chapter, and we’ll give you your next steps.
*NOTE : The study revealing that a 4 out of 5 businesses are dissatisfied with their conversion rates 
can be found at Econsultancy .
Chapter 08: Leveraging Conversion Rate
Optimization to Drive Growth258Become an Optimization & Testing Specialist
With DigitalMarketer’s Optimization Specialist training, you’ll learn the skills 
covered in this chapter and more.
The critical pages that need immediate optimization—in most cases, the well-
performing pages would perform even better with a little optimization.
The 3 crucial factors for prioritizing your optimization campaigns.
The 3 most effective tools for collecting user data (and how to use them).
How to create a report to show your findings so the test is implemented 
properly and you get the credit you so richly deserve.
Click Here to Learn More »

Chapter 09: What’s Next?260Congratulations! 
You’ve completed The Ultimate Guide to Digital Marketing , which means 
you’re part of an exclusive group of marketers who know how to attract, 
engage, and convert your customers in a social, digital environment.
Simply by applying the lessons you’ve learned in this Guide, you’ll have a 
huge advantage over your competitors.
So what’s next?
The foundations you’ve laid as you’ve gone through this Guide are solid—
they’ll help you grow your business and start making headway to meet your 
goals. 
We can say with utmost confidence you’ll likely see improved metrics across 
every area of your business.
But the wonderful thing about digital marketing is that there’s no limit to 
what you can achieve . Your next step is to develop your skills in each of these 
areas, so you can outpace your competitors and anticipate the needs of your 
customers.
That’s how you achieve real growth as a digital marketer: creating and 
optimizing your Customer Value Journey.
For Startups, Agencies, or Business Owners
If you want to create the ultimate marketing dream team capable of 
implementing everything you’ve learned in this Guide, you’re going to want to 
join DigitalMarketer HQ. CHAPTER
09
Chapter 09: What’s Next?261We’ll help you:
• Build a new team
• Training your existing team
• Track their progress
• Improve retention
• Grow your sales
The secret is to cross-train all 8 CRITICAL Core Disciplines of Digital 
Marketing, so everyone is on the same page, working together.
As a member of DigitalMarketer HQ, your team will be trained and certified in 
the following disciplines:
You’ll rest easy knowing your marketing is being done right. We’ll make sure 
your teams stay up to date on what’s working now.
Chapter 09: What’s Next?262For Digital Marketing Professionals and Students
Maybe you’re currently employed as a digital marketing professional. Maybe 
you sell digital marketing services, or you’re a student hoping to land a great 
job in a fun, in-demand, high-paying field…
Your next step is to become certified in the marketing discipline that’s you use 
most.
Get Your Team Trained & Certified Today »